Published by The British Sub-Aqua Club in the interests of diving safety
The British Sub-Aqua Club
NDC Diving Incidents Report
2000
Compiled by
Brian Cumming
Diving Safety and Incidents Advisor

` NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000
Introduction
This booklet contains the year 2000 Diving Incidents Report, produced by The British Sub-Aqua Club  (BSAC) in
the interest of promoting diving safety.  It is important to note that it contains details of UK diving incidents
occurring to divers of all affiliations, plus incidents occurring worldwide involving BSAC members.
Report Format
The majority of statistical information contained within this report is also shown in graphical form.  Please note that all
statistical information is produced from UK data only and does not include Overseas Incidents unless noted as ‘All
Incidents’.
The contents of this report are split into an overview of the year, and then the details of nine incident categories plus some
historical analyses.  The various sections can be found as shown below:-
i) Overview Page 1
ii) Fatalities Page 5
iii) Decompression Incidents Page  8
iv) Injury / illness Page 18
v) Boating & Surface Incidents Page 22
vi) Ascent Problems Page 27
vii) Technique Problems Page 31
viii) Equipment Problems Page 33
ix) Miscellaneous Incidents Page 35
x) Overseas Incidents Page 36
xi) Numerical & Statistical Analyses Page 40
xii) List of Abbreviations Page 42
Within each category the incidents are listed in the order of their occurrence, not necessarily that of Incident Reference.
They are laid out in the following form:
MONTH/YR OF INCIDENT INCIDENT REF.
Brief Narrative of Incident....................................................................................
........................................................................................................
The nature of many diving incidents is such that there is usually more than one cause or effect.  Where this is the case
the incident has been classified under the more appropriate cause or effect. For instance an incident involving a fast
ascent, causing decompression illness, will be classified under 'Decompression Incidents'.
Brian Cumming,
BSAC Diving Incidents Advisor,
November 2000
Acknowledgements
Data for this report are collected from several different sources.  I would like to extend my thanks and appreciation to the
following for their assistance in its production and in ensuring its completeness:
Reg Hill, Coastguard Sport Diving Liaison Officer
Peter Bradley, Sea Safety Liaison Officer, Royal National Lifeboat Institution
and, in particular, all of those divers and other sources who have taken the
trouble to complete Incident Reports and share their learning experience with
others.
Finally, to Dr. Yvonne Couch for proof reading this report

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
©BS-AC - 2000 1
Overview
has seen a slight rise in the total number of
incidents that have been reported.  In the 2000
incident year (October 99 to September 00
inclusive) 417 incidents have been recorded, compared with
382 in 1999 and 431 in 1998.
This year the BSAC reinstated its subscription to a press
cutting service (which was suspended during the last incident
year) and this will account for a small part of the increase over
1999.
Conversely a small reduction will have occurred due to the non-
availability of data from the RNLI from the end of July 00
onwards.  This occurred because the RNLI are in the process
of updating their computer systems.  It is anticipated that the
2001 report will see a return to normal.
The distribution of these reports is shown in the following chart.
As can be seen, 68% of these incidents have occurred in the
summer period.  This is totally consistent with previous years,
reflecting the increased number of dives that take place during
the warmer weather.
Monthly breakdown of all incidents - 2000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Incidents by category
The incident database categorises all incidents into one of nine
major categories, and the following chart shows the distribution
of the 2000 incidents into those categories.
This chart reflects an important change from previous years.
DCI incidents have overtaken surface and boating incidents.
The number of incidents of DCI has risen from 86 in 1999 to
125 in 2000, whilst the number of surface and boating incidents
has fallen from 114 in 1999 to 99 in 2000.  The number of
incidents reported is relatively small and some variability from
year to year must be expected; however such a rise in cases of
DCI is of concern.  DCI is covered later in this summary report
and the major causal factors are identified.
The reduction in the number of surface and boating incidents is
almost all due to a 20% reduction in the number of cases of
lost divers.  These incidents typically involve divers who, upon
surfacing at the end of their dive, find themselves out of contact
with their boat, and very often a long and expensive search
takes place, almost always successfully.  This subject has
been highlighted in many previous reports and presentations on
diving statistics, and it is hoped that this is a real trend
indicating that divers and dive marshals are taking more care
with this issue.
Categorisation of the year’s incidents
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140
Overseas
Miscellaneous
Technique
Fatalities
Equipment
Ascents
Injury / Illness
Boat / surface
DCI
This chart indicates 16 incidents involving fatalities, but one of
these was a double fatality.
Fatalities
The report includes 17 UK fatalities of which 6 involved BSAC
members.  17 Fatalities is in line with the average number of
UK fatalities that have been experienced in the last five years
(17.8) but it is higher than the average of the last ten years
(15.3), indicating a continuation of the trend of increasing
deaths that was identified last year.
Fatalities of BSAC membership are just below the averages of
the past five and ten years.
The following chart shows the number of deaths per 10,000
BSAC members for each of the last 22 years and a clear
downward trend can be seen.
The trend line indicates a near halving of the fatality rate during
this period.  During this time diving has certainly become more
adventurous with the advent of fast small boats and specialist
hardboats bringing easy access to much more challenging
sites.  Given this background, one might have expected a
significant increase in the number of fatal incidents and yet we
see an apparent doubling of safety in this period.
Each fatality is a tragedy and we must not become complacent
but we should recognise what has been achieved.  A number of
factors are likely to have been at work here but the quality of
the BSAC training programme and the high standards of all of
our instructors clearly lays at the heart of this welcome trend.
2000
BSAC Fatalities
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000
Year
D
ea
th
s 
/ 1
0 
K
 m
em
be
rs

` NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000
2 ©BS-AC - 2000
The causal factors behind the UK fatalities can be summarised
as follows:-
· Two cases involved people who experienced serious but
unforeseeable medical problems whilst in or under the
water.
· Four cases involved deep dives.
In three of these cases divers may have accidentally
gone to, or have been swept to, depths deeper than
planned.
The fourth case involved a diver who was using a
rebreather and who was returning from a dive to 82m
when he got into difficulties.  This diver was not
recovered and the cause of the problem is not known.
· A second case of a fatality of a diver using a rebreather
occurred when the diver surfaced unconscious from a
wreck dive.  Again the exact cause is not known.
· One case involved a diver who was diving solo with a
single person attending in a boat.  This diver’s body was
eventually recovered from the seabed at a depth of 6m.
· One case involved a diver who had become tangled in
some ropes at the surface during a shore dive.  The
exact cause of the problem is not known.
· Two cases involved air supply problems.
One diver ran out of air and was lost during an attempted
ascent using the other divers alternative air source.
In the second case a diver experienced regulator
problems and made a rapid ascent to the surface where
he was found unconscious.
This leaves six remaining cases where there is simply
insufficient information to draw any conclusions with respect to
the causes.
· Two involved divers who became unconscious whilst
underwater and, although they were recovered at the
time, they did not survive.
· Four involved divers who were lost underwater.  The body
of one was recovered 4 weeks later and three are still
missing at the time of writing.
In many of the above cases it is clear that accepted safe diving
practices were not being followed.
Incident depths
The following chart shows the maximum depth of the dive
during which the incident took place, summarised into depth
range groupings.
Maximum depth of dive involving an incident
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
>60m
51-60m
41-50m
31-40m
21-30m
11-20m
1-10m
Surf.
Unknown
The pattern is very similar to that normally seen and reflects the
frequency of diving in these depth ranges.
There is a continuation of the trend identified last year of dives
to over 50m.  In 1998 6 incidents involved dives to over 50m, in
1999 the number was 12 and this year it is 16.
Three of these sixteen incidents at depths of over 50m resulted
in fatalities; this is a significantly higher fatality to incident ratio
than is seen in the shallower depth ranges.  The potential for
problems increases significantly as diving depth increases.
The BSAC advises that no dive should be deeper than 50m,
and that dives to 50m should only be conducted by divers who
are appropriately trained and qualified.
The recommended limit for divers trained to Sports Diver
standard is 35m and then only when they have received
appropriate training for diving at this depth.
The next chart shows the depth at which the incident started.
Inevitably the data is biased towards the shallower depths since
many incidents happen during the ascent or at the surface.
Critical among these are the DCI cases where almost always
the casualty is out of the water before any problems are noted.
This partially explains the large occurrence of ‘surface’ cases
as this includes divers with DCI who have left the water.
Depth at which an incident started
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
>60m
51-60m
41-50m
31-40m
21-30m
11-20m
1-10m
Surf.
Unknown
Other surface incidents involve boats and boating incidents.
2000 has been a typical year for boating problems.  53
incidents involved engine failure, and 10 cases involved
problems with boats themselves.
As reported earlier, the numbers of divers becoming separated
from their boats has reduced from 51 instances in 1999 to 40
reported in this incident year.
Inadequate maintenance is certain to be the cause of many of
the engine problems.
Engine failure, with divers underwater, often results in lost
divers since the boat is no longer able to recover them.  These
divers are then left floating at the surface until discovered.  The
search operation is often very extensive with lifeboats, other
craft and helicopters deployed to find the missing divers.
As in previous years, the benefits of effective surface detection
aids are highlighted, especially in the Coastguard reports.
Diver Qualifications
The next two charts show the qualification of those BSAC
members who were involved in reported incidents.
Qualification of the divers involved in incidents

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
©BS-AC - 2000 3
0 10 20 30 40 50
1st Class
Advanced
Dive Leader
Sports Diver
Club/Ocean
Novice
Snorkel
It is important to note that these divers were involved in the
incident but this does not necessarily mean that they suffered
the effects of it.  Some were involved as rescuers or in some
other indirect way.
Qualification of instructors involved in incidents
0 10 20
National
Advanced
Open Water
Club
Assistant Club
Snorkel
Unknown
An analysis of incident by diver qualification shows that no
grade of diver, from novice to instructor, is immune to
problems.  It is all too easy to make the assumption that only
inexperienced divers get into problems, but the chart shows
that this is not so.
Although the data suggest that divers at the level of Sports
Diver are the most prone to problems one must be careful in
the interpretation of these data.  The picture is clearly distorted
by the numbers of members that we have at each of these
grades.  It is very probable that the largest single group of
members are Sports Divers, hence the high incidence of
problems.
The distribution of these qualification data conforms to the
pattern seen in previous years.
Divers’ use of the Emergency Services
Divers’ use of the rescue services shows a monthly distribution
aligned to the distribution of all incidents, and is clearly
correlated with the number of dives that are taking place.  Our
demands upon the Coastguard service were typical for the
year, as were our calls upon the services of the RNLI.
UK Incidents involving the Coastguard agency
 - Monthly breakdown
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Incidents invovling HM Coastguard: 225
Divers’ use of RNLI facilities by month
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Incidents involving Lifeboats: 110
Also very similar to last year has been divers’ need for
assistance by helicopter.  There were two main reasons for
this; firstly the transportation of divers with DCI to
recompression facilities and, secondly, for the location of lost
divers.
Divers’ use of SAR helicopters by month
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Incidents involving helicopters : 90
Decompression Incidents
The BSAC database contains 125 reports of DCI incidents,
some of which involve more than one casualty.  When these
multiple cases are counted the result is 134 incidents of DCI.

` NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000
4 ©BS-AC - 2000
In 1999 there were 86 cases of DCI recorded and in 1998 the
number was 120; sadly, the improvement that was indicated
last year was not maintained.
An analysis of the causal factors associated with these cases
indicates the following:-
47 involve diving to greater than 30m
46 involve rapid ascents
30 involve missed decompression stops
24 involve repeat diving
Some cases involve more than one of these causes.
The report includes several cases of ‘Diver illness’ reported by
the RNLI and whilst the nature of this illness is not recorded it is
very likely that these are further cases of DCI.
Poor buoyancy control is at the heart of the majority of these
cases.  Divers are failing to correctly control their ascent,
especially in the critical last 10m zone and ending up with rapid
ascents and/or missed decompression stops.  Very often the
diver is using a drysuit and is unable to prevent a buoyant
ascent.
Better training is clearly indicated and Diving Officers, Training
Officers and Instructors should work to ensure that the skills of
their trainees are particularly well practised in this area.
Several of the incidents involve divers using unfamiliar
equipment and ending up with buoyancy problems.  It is
important to familiarise oneself with new equipment in a safe
environment prior to using it in more challenging
circumstances.
Whenever possible it is safest to ascend from the dive using a
shotline, this will provide the diver with the opportunity to stop
and correct a buoyancy problem before an uncontrolled  ascent
and accompanying pressure reduction takes place; once a
rapid ascent is underway it is very hard to stop.
In Conclusion
The 2000 incident year has not highlighted any major new
concerns.  Most of the incidents reported within this document
could have been avoided had those involved followed a few
basic principles of safe diving practice.  Those that I would
emphasise, as I have done before, are:-
· Dive within your limits.
· Build your experience gradually.
· Practice the basic skills until you are faultless, and then
keep in practice.
· Plan and equip yourself correctly for the dive.
· Maintain constant vigilance whilst involved in diving
activities and be ready to act quickly as soon as things
start to go astray.
· Ensure that equipment is fully and correctly serviced
(both diving and boating).
Please read the detailed reports in this booklet carefully and
use them to learn from others’ mistakes. They have had the
courage and generosity to record their experiences for
publication, the least that we can do is to use this information to
avoid similar problems.
Finally, if you must have an incident please report it on our
Incident Report form, available free from BSAC HQ or via the
BSAC internet website.
As always, your anonymity is assured – great care is taken to
preserve the confidentiality of any personal information
recorded in BSAC Incident Reports.

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC - 2000 5
Fatalities
October 1999 00/010
Two divers entered the water to start their dive.  They
descended to 6m where one felt that he was under-weighted.
They returned to the boat for extra weights.  They descended
again but he still felt light and they decided to abandon the
dive.  At the surface he was seen to be unconscious by his
buddy who towed him to some nearby rocks.  Here she
removed his kit and pulled him onto the rocks.  Some time
passed before she was able to attract the attention of people on
the boat.  The boat was collecting other divers.  Once the
situation was realized the boat approached the rocks and
another diver swam to assist.  He discovered that the
unconscious diver had no pulse and commenced CPR.  The
Coastguard was alerted and a helicopter and lifeboat went to
assist.  The unconscious diver was recovered by helicopter and
taken to hospital.  The others were recovered by the lifeboat
and all returned to shore.  The unconscious diver was
pronounced to be dead on arrival at hospital.
UK Fatalities - Monthly breakdown
from October 1999 to September 2000  incl.
0
1
2
3
4
October 1999 00/015
Two divers completed a dive to a maximum depth of 14m for a
duration of 28 mins, which included a stop of 1 min at 6m and a
further 30 secs at 3m.  At the surface they exchanged OK
signals and finned away from the shotline to be recovered into
the boat.  A line was thrown from the boat to the divers to tow
them away from some rocks, prior to recovery.  During this tow,
one of the divers seemed to get into difficulties and her buddy
took hold of her and the line.  The distressed diver was unable
to climb the ladder to get back into the boat and swam towards
a nearby breakwater, her buddy went with her.  At the
breakwater the distressed diver became unresponsive, her
buddy gave the distress signal and inflated her BCD.  An RHIB
came to their assistance and the casualty was recovered into
the boat.  She was given oxygen and CPR.  A Coastguard
helicopter arrived and the casualty was taken to hospital.  She
was subsequently taken to a recompression facility for
treatment and then returned to hospital.  The casualty was kept
on a life support machine for a number of days, but did not
recover.  It was subsequently revealed that this diver had
suffered from a stroke.
November 1999 00/028
Two trainees and an instructor were at 27m when they were
caught in a powerful down current.  The instructor attempted to
fin himself and the trainees upwards but the current carried
them down to 46m.  The instructor inflated the BCD of one of
the trainees, but the other was lost.  The instructor and one
trainee managed to return safely to the surface.  Other divers
entered the water to search, they found a fin, then a note pad
and finally the missing diver's body, at a depth of 55m.  They
brought her to the surface and a lifeboat and helicopter
assisted.  The diver was brought ashore but failed to recover.
March 2000 00/066
Two divers were conducting a shore dive.  They surfaced 180m
offshore from a depth of 8m.  They were seen to be in distress,
and are believed to have been tangled in some buoys.
Members of the public alerted the Coastguard and a lifeboat
was launched.  A small dinghy was launched to assist but this
capsized.  One of the divers brought the other to the shore
where resuscitation attempts were made.  The capsized dinghy
and its owner were recovered by the lifeboat.  Both divers were
taken to hospital but one was pronounced dead on arrival.
May 2000 00/091
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of around
16m in calm conditions with very good underwater visibility.
They dived from an RHIB, on a wreck, close to a rocky
coastline.  The wreck was broken up with no penetration
opportunities.  35 mins into the dive they exchanged OK signals
and shortly afterwards became separated.  One of the pair
searched around the wreckage for his buddy and then found
himself in a narrow gully being pushed towards the cliffs by
surging water.  He was at a depth of 5m and surfaced.  He was
unable to re-descend because of buoyancy and low air supply.
Another diver from the group came to assist and conducted a 7
mins search of the area.  The RHIB was used to search the
area and the Coastguard was notified.  Two other members of
the group re-kitted and entered the water to search.  A
helicopter also joined the search and its diver conducted a
search of the wreck.  A lifeboat and other craft searched the
sea and a Coastguard team searched the shore.  Later in the
day two divers conducted an extensive circular sweep search of
the wreck.  Further searches were conducted the following day,
but the missing diver was not found.  The diver's body was
recovered 4 weeks later.
May 2000 00/102
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 35m.
During their return to the surface, at a depth of 20m, one of the
pair signaled that she had only 80 bar of air remaining.  They
continued towards the surface up an incline.  Shortly afterwards
the other diver indicated that he was out of air and started to
use the buddy's alternative air source.  They started an ascent
directly to the surface.  At a depth of 10m the diver who was out
of air moved away from his buddy and 'drifted out of view'.  The
buddy continued to the surface and raised the alarm.  Dive
duration 29 mins.  The lost diver was recovered from 20m, 15
mins later, but he failed to respond to resuscitation attempts.
May 2000 00/108
Two divers were conducting a wreck dive with a maximum
depth of 30m.  15 mins into the dive one of the pair discovered
his buddy unconscious on the wreck at a depth of 20m.  He
released the casualty's weightbelt and brought him to the
surface.  At the surface both divers were recovered into their

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 1999
6 ©BS-AC - 2000
boat and resuscitation techniques were applied to the casualty.
The Coastguard was alerted and the casualty was taken ashore
in a fast boat.  Resuscitation was continued, but he was
pronounced dead by a doctor who met the group when it
arrived at the shore.  It is reported that initial post mortem
results indicated that he had suffered something akin to an
epileptic fit whilst underwater.
June 2000 00/132
The Coastguard was alerted when a diver was 15 mins overdue
from a planned 50 min dive.  A helicopter and lifeboats were
launched to search.  Divers from other dive boats organized a
search of the seabed.  The lost diver was found over 60 mins
later in a depth of 6m.  He was brought to the surface and
resuscitation attempted.  The diver was air lifted to hospital but
failed to recover.  The diver had been diving alone with one
person waiting in the boat.  When found the diver's equipment
was separated from him on the seabed.
June 2000 00/134
A diver, using a closed circuit rebreather, surfaced unconscious
from a wreck dive.  The dive boat broadcast a 'Mayday'.  The
casualty was airlifted to hospital by Coastguard helicopter.  The
diver was certified dead at the hospital.   (Coastguard & RNLI
report)
June 2000 00/140
A group of eight divers in two boats were diving on a wreck in
48m.  Two pairs were in the water when a third pair entered
from a smaller boat tied astern of the main boat.  The first pair
returned and the fourth pair was getting ready to dive when one
of the third pair resurfaced 9m away from the boat and shouted
that his buddy had a problem.  This diver was recovered into
the small boat and reported that his buddy was unconscious at
the bottom of the rope that was tying them to the wreck.  One
of the fourth pair went down to the wreck and conducted a
search for the missing diver but returned after 9 mins without
having found him.  The Coastguard was alerted and the other
diver was placed on oxygen as he had made a fast ascent.  A
helicopter and lifeboat undertook a search but without success.
Police and other divers searched the wreck over subsequent
days but the missing diver was not found.
July 2000 00/158
A group of five divers were diving on a wreck at a depth of 30m.
Underwater visibility was low.  7 mins into the dive one of the
group indicated that he wished to surface.  The group
ascended to the surface but one of the party was found to be
missing.  The Coastguard was alerted and a helicopter and
lifeboat were launched to assist.  Extensive underwater and
surface searches failed to locate the missing diver.
July 2000 00/165
A diver was diving in a lake 200m offshore at a depth of 30m.
He is believed to have had a problem with his regulator and,
despite his buddy's attempts to assist, he made a rapid ascent
to the surface.  The buddy made a normal ascent, which
included decompression stops.  The diver who had made the
rapid ascent was found face down at the surface.  He was
recovered to the shore and the emergency services were
called.  The diver was taken to hospital but pronounced dead
on arrival.
August 2000 00/178
Two divers were conducting a wreck dive at a depth of 43m.
One of the pair became entangled in some ropes and the
second diver cut him free.  The diver who had been tangled
then indicated that they should ascend.  They started a normal
ascent but then the diver who had signaled the ascent began to
fin hard for the surface, with his buddy struggling to keep up.
At 20m this diver stopped finning and sank quickly back down
to the seabed with his arms flailing.  The buddy followed him
back down and discovered him lying on the seabed with his
regulator out of his mouth and his mask half off.  He tried to
place a regulator into the casualty's mouth.  Using a controlled
buoyant lift the buddy lifted the casualty towards the surface.
By this time his computer showed 17 mins decompression.  At
15m he deployed a delayed SMB and put more air into the
casualty's SMB, sending him to the surface.  The buddy then
ascended to 6m and completed a 15 min decompression stop.
The casualty was recovered into the boat which then took him
directly to harbour.  A nearby boat was contacted by radio to
collect the remaining divers.  The casualty failed to recover.  It
is believed that the cause of death was drowning.
BSAC Fatalities against membership 1982-2000
(UK data only)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
BSAC Fatalities Membership ('000)
August 2000 00/179
Two divers had completed a wreck dive to a maximum depth of
82m using rebreathers.  They were completing their
decompression stops at 6m when one of the pair suddenly spat
out his mouthpiece and made a rush towards the surface.  His
buddy lost sight of him at 3m due to poor underwater visibility
near the surface.  The buddy completed his stops and
surfaced.  It was then discovered that the other diver was
missing.  An extensive search was made involving two
helicopters, two lifeboats, and other craft.  The diver was not
found.
August 2000 00/214
Two divers were participating in a week long diving expedition.
On the first day they conducted two successful dives to a
maximum depth of 25m.  On the second day a dive to a
submerged reef was planned.  The top of the reef was
approximately 25m deep and it went down to over 60m.  A
shotline was deployed on the top of the reef.  The shotline had
a small weight running through a snap hook at the top end to
tension it.  The first pair dived and found the shot at a depth of
26m and little current.  The second pair entered the water and
dived a distance from the shotline.    The third pair entered the
water, one swam underwater to the line and the other drifted
onto it with the current.  The shot buoy was seen to 'dip' in the
water and those on the boat believe that the weight had been
pulled off of the reef.  The boat party shouted to them to abort

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC - 2000 7
the dive but were not heard.  Both divers and the shot buoy left
the surface together.  The shot buoy did not reappear.  The
delayed SMB of the first pair appeared.  Then a second
delayed SMB appeared, this turned out to be the second pair
who had found that they were off of the reef and aborted their
dive.  The boat maneuvered towards the second buoy and on
the way one of the divers from the third pair was spotted,
motionless, at the surface.  This diver had his mask in place,
but his regulator was out of his mouth.  He was face up, but his
face was underwater.  Another diver entered the water from the
boat and started to give AV to the casualty.  A MAYDAY call
was made.  The casualty's BCD and drysuit were inflated but
he was very heavy in the water and the rescuing diver had
difficulty staying at the surface.  Another diver reached from the
boat and attempted to further inflate the casualty's BCD but the
air vented from the overpressure valve, indicating that it was
already full.  The BCD and cylinder was removed from the diver
and the rescuing diver took hold of it.  It started to drag him
under water and he released it, it then sank.  This BCD had an
integrated weight system.  The casualty also wore a separate
weightbelt.  The casualty was recovered onto the boat and
resuscitation was continued.  No pulse could be found and
oxygen assisted AV together with CPR was carried out.  The
diver's computer indicated a maximum depth of 62m, a dive
duration of 9 mins and a fast ascent warning.  40 mins after the
recovery of the casualty a helicopter arrived and a heart
monitor was used on the casualty.  An inshore lifeboat arrived
with a doctor.  At this point the casualty was pronounced dead.
An extensive search was begun for the other diver of this pair.
The search was continued for many days and included
helicopters, lifeboats, other craft, divers and remote controlled
underwater vehicles.  No trace of the missing diver was found.
September 2000 00/242
A group of divers were diving on a wreck with depths ranging
from 38 to 48m.  At the end of the dive each of the divers
deployed his/her own delayed SMB.  They started their ascent.
One of the group was seen by his buddy switching to a
decompression cylinder, containing nitrox 50, at their first stop
at 12m.  The buddy continued to his own first stop at 6m at
which point he was unable to see the diver at 12m due to water
clarity.  The diver who had been at 12m failed to return to the
surface.  A search involving a helicopter, three lifeboats and
other craft continued for 2 days.  The missing diver was not
found.

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000
8 ©BS-AC - 2000
Decompression Incidents
October 1999 00/256
A diver made a rapid ascent due to a faulty BCD inlet valve.
Her dive profile was 32.7m for 20 mins. She missed 18 mins of
stops. Type 2 DCI was diagnosed and she was airlifted to
DDRC for treatment.  (Coastguard report).
October 1999 00/258
A diver surfaced sick and shaking after missing a stop following
an 18-minute dive to 42m. He was airlifted by Coastguard
helicopter to a hyperbaric unit for treatment.  (Coastguard
report).
October 1999 00/012
Two divers descended to a wreck in a depth of 43m.  One of
the divers experienced a buoyancy problem and her buddy tried
to pull her down to the wreck.  They came off of the wreck and
ended up on the seabed.  The buddy deployed a delayed SMB
and they started to ascend.  They lost buoyancy control during
the ascent and both divers rose to the surface.  The computer
of one of the divers indicated missed stops at 15m.  One diver
complained of 'pins and needles' in his legs and he was placed
on oxygen.  After a further 25 mins the party arrived back at the
shore and the diver reported that his 'pins and needles' had
now 'totally diminished'.  He declined to seek recompression
advice.  The other diver had no symptoms.  Later their
condition deteriorated and they both received recompression
treatment.  The diver who had had 'pins and needles' required
five recompression sessions and was left with numbness in a
toe  and a finger and overall stiffness.
October 1999 00/260
A diver became separated from his 2 buddies during a 45-
metre dive for 36 mins.He surfaced missing all stops. Given O2
on dive boat and helicopter evacuation was arranged.
Meanwhile, 2 buddies surfaced and all 3 were taken to a
hyperbaric unit by helicopter. En-route one buddy suffered Type
1 DCI symptoms.  (Coastguard report).
October 1999 00/259
A diver and buddy dived to 34m for 28 mins. One diver had
buoyancy problems whilst making a 12m stop, she made a
rapid ascent. Shortly afterwards she complained of shoulder
pain. She was later admitted to a hyperbaric unit for treatment.
This diver claimed to be PADI trained, but because PADI do
not train for decompression diving, she was therefore not
trained!  (Coastguard report).
October 1999 00/007
A diver completed a series of ascents and descents as part of
a training session.  The following morning he noticed a pain in
his left arm.  He was referred to a recompression facility where
he received treatment for a type 1 DCI.
October 1999 00/262
A 70-metre dive in a quarry and missed stops resulted in a
diver contracting decompression sickness. The diver and his
 buddy were airlifted to a hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
October 1999 00/023
Two pairs of divers planned a dive to 50m.  Once they had
reached the bottom they started to explore a wreck.  At this
point the drysuit inflation hose of one of the divers became
disconnected from his suit and began to free flow.  He was
unable to reconnect it and could not prevent the air loss.  His
buddy was also unable to resolve the problem.  They made a
fast ascent, disorientated by the mass of bubbles in the water.
During the ascent they became separated and the diver with
the free flow rose rapidly to the surface.  His buddy made a
more controlled ascent but elected to miss several minutes of
decompression stops so that he could assist at the surface.  At
the surface their cover boat had to take action to avoid the
diver being run down by another boat.  The diver with the free
flow was recovered into his boat and placed on oxygen.  The
diver was transferred onto a hardboat and the Coastguard
alerted.  The diver started to experience paralysis of his legs.
A lifeboat was launched and the hardboat sailed to meet it.
The diver was transferred onto the lifeboat and taken to a
recompression facility for treatment.  A type 2 DCI was
diagnosed.  This diver required subsequent recompression
treatment.  The buddy experienced no symptoms and was not
recompressed.
October 1999 00/035
Two divers conducted a dive to 6m for 30 mins.  2 hours later
they dived again to 19m for 30 mins.  The following day one of
the pair felt a tingling at the back of one of his knees.  He
sought medical advice and undertook a 5 hour recompression
treatment.  After this treatment the symptoms became worse.
He experienced a tingling in his arms and legs, lethargy, thirst
at night and physical weakness.  Eight weeks later he still had
these symptoms but to a lesser extent.
Decompression incidents by month
0
5
10
15
20
25
November 1999 00/049
A diver made a dive to a wreck at a depth of 38m.  Visibility
was poor and she became separated from her buddy.  She
suffered nitrogen narcosis and made a rapid ascent to the
surface, missing approximately 7 mins of decompression stops.
At the surface she was recovered into the boat.  Her buddy
surfaced 10 mins later having spent time trying to find her prior
to ascending.  The diver who had missed stops then developed
pains in her left elbow and a tingling sensation in her left hand.
She was placed on oxygen and taken ashore.  Once ashore,
she was taken to a recompression facility where she received

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC -2000 9
treatment.
January 2000 00/050
A diver completed a dive to 26m for 18 mins.  During the dive
he had been under weighted and had collected stones from the
seabed to increase his weight.  At 6m, during the ascent, he
lost control of his ascent rate and rose rapidly to the surface.  3
mins after surfacing this diver noticed a loss of sensation in his
right hand.  Once ashore an ambulance was called and a
recompression facility alerted to the incident.  Whilst waiting for
the ambulance the diver was given nitrox 40.  The diver's
symptoms worsened for a while, with loss of sensation in his
left leg, dizziness and some confusion, and then improved with
feeling returning to arm and leg.  The diver received four
recompression treatments over the following two days.  A full
recovery was reported.
January 2000 00/269
Two divers became entangled in rope at 54m; after freeing
themselves, they ascended, missing stops. Both showed signs
of DCI on the boat and were airlifted by military helicopter to a
hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
February 2000 00/090
An instructor and two trainees made a dive to 18m. After 8
mins the instructor's compass malfunctioned and they surfaced
to regain their bearings.  They re-descended and continued
with the dive.  15 mins later one of the trainees stopped to clear
her mask and lost contact with the other two.  She developed
cramp in her leg.  Visibility was very low and after looking
around her she made an ascent to the surface.  At the surface
she regained contact with the other two and they left the water.
2 hours 15 mins later they dived again to a maximum depth of
18m for a duration of 30 mins.  Later, on the journey home the
diver who had become separated felt cold and had a dull ache
in the center of her chest.  She then began to develop 'pins and
needles' in her fingers.  At first this was considered to have
been the effects of cold.  Her journey took her to altitude and
the feeling extended to the palms of her hands.  The
emergency services were contacted and they were met by an
ambulance.  She was placed on oxygen and taken to hospital.
From here she was transferred to a recompression facility.
During this time the 'pins and needles' progressed into her feet
and ankles.  She was given three sessions of recompression.
The other divers experienced no symptoms.
February 2000 00/092
A diver conducted a dive to 58m.  During the dive he planned to
swim through a 12m long tunnel.  In the tunnel the visibility was
2m and he became disorientated and started to panic.  He
managed to get out of the tunnel and regain control.  15 mins of
decompression stops were conducted at 3m and the total dive
duration was 47 mins.  3 hours later he dived again to 35m for
32 mins as a no stop dive.  7 hours later he complained of a
shoulder pain.  2 hours later he was found to have rashes and
raised blotches on his back.  He received 4 hours 30 mins
recompression treatment.  It was uncertain if this was a DCI or
a strain.
February 2000 00/272
A diver surfaced with DCI following a 27m dive for 20 mins,
previous dives to 32m and 27m. He was transferred ashore
 by lifeboat for onward passage to a hyperbaric unit.
(Coastguard & RNLI report)
March 2000 00/071
After a dive to a maximum depth of 30m for a duration of 32
mins, two divers started their ascent.  One of the pair used his
delayed SMB to send the anchor to the surface and the other
deployed his SMB to mark their position.  During the ascent the
diver with the SMB experienced problems dumping air from his
drysuit through the dump valve, and lost control of his
buoyancy.  His buddy tried to slow his ascent but he was
carried to the surface missing 14 mins of decompression stops.
The Coastguard was alerted and the diver flown to a
recompression facility for treatment.
March 2000 00/273
Coastguard received a report of a diver on the shoreline with a
cut head and DCI. He was taken to a hyperbaric unit by
ambulance. (Coastguard report)
March 2000 00/274
A diver made two 50m and one 25m dives for 'horrendous'
times. He suffered DCI (unable to walk). Transferred to a
hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report)
March 2000 00/278
Two divers made a rapid ascent from 31m whilst buddy
breathing (one ran out of air). One diver complained of
tightness of the chest and pins and needles. Both were airlifted
to a hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
March 2000 00/279
A fast ascent from 12m resulted in 'pins and needles' in the
hands. This diver was taken to a hyperbaric unit by ambulance.
(Coastguard report).
March 2000 00/081
A diver completed a dive to 35m for a duration of 27 mins
which included 15 mins at 6m.  2 hours 30 mins later he was 6
mins into a second dive, at a depth of 6m, when he indicated a
problem to his buddy.  The dive was aborted and, at the
surface, he felt unwell and was very cold and shaky.  His
condition deteriorated and he was taken to hospital.  He
developed paralysis in the lower half of his body and was taken
to a recompression facility.  He received a total of four
recompression sessions and the symptoms were fully resolved.
March 2000 00/281
A fast ascent from 50m due to an over inflated drysuit resulted
in 12 minutes of missed stops. The diver was airlifted to a
hyperbaric unit for treatment.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/282
A 5 man dive team had been practicing decompression stops.
One of the divers surfaced severely fatigued and vague. He
was airlifted to a hyperbaric unit for treatment. So much for
practice!  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/285
A diver surfaced with pains in his arms. He was airlifted to a
hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/284
Following a dive to 37m for 21 mins, one of a buddy pair
surfaced with pins and needles. Both were airlifted to a
hyperbaric unit. Only 10 bar of air from a 12 l cylinder was
noted on the surface.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/287

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000
10 ©BS-AC - 2000
A diver made two dives, the first to 35m for 34 mins and the
second to 24m for 38 mins, with a 2.5 hour surface interval. He
complained of tingling in the hands and wrists and was taken to
a hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/117
Two divers completed a dive to 26m for a total of 38 mins that
included a 3 min stop at 9m and a 1 min stop at 6m.  During
the ascent one of the pair received an ascent speed warning
from his computer which he was able to control.  They had to
wait to be picked up by their boat and the diver who had had
the ascent warning felt nauseous once he was back in the boat.
He was sick several times and felt a little better.  He was cold
and shivering.  He took a Stugeron tablet.  He began to notice
a tingling in the little finger of each hand and in his cheeks.
The tingling in his hands then began to spread and he was
placed on oxygen.  Oxygen was supplied from a diving cylinder
with an octopus regulator attached.  One of the second stages
began to free flow.  The tingling sensation spread and
worsened.  The Coastguard was alerted and the diver was
airlifted to a recompression facility.  The diver was advised not
to dive for 4 to 6 weeks.
Percentage analysis of factors involved in
cases of DCI
0 10 20 30 40 50
Percentage Occurrence
Repeat Dives  
Within Limits  
Misuse/Missed
stops  
Rapid Ascent  
Dive >30m  
April 2000 00/220
Three divers conducted a 26 min dive to a depth of 17m.
During the descent one of the group experienced a sinus
problem.  During the dive they conducted controlled buoyant lift
and mask and regulator clearing drills.  Once back in the boat,
the diver with the sinus problem complained of a headache.
Later that day he reported feeling fatigued, generally unwell and
still had a headache.  Medical advice was sought and a
neurological bend was diagnosed.  The diver was successfully
recompressed.
April 2000 00/289
A dive to 45m for 25 mins with no stops lead a diver to suffer
tingling sensations in the arms and fingers. He was taken
ashore by his boat and transferred by ambulance to a
hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/290
A rapid ascent from 25m caused a spinal bend. The diver was
airlifted to a hyperbaric unit for treatment.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/127
A diver completed a dive to 22m for a total duration of 34 mins,
which included a 1 min stop at 6m.  The following morning she
had a tingling feeling in both hands and feet and she felt
extremely tired.  During the day she felt itchy, the tingling
continued, and, that evening, she developed an ache in her
elbow.  The next morning the ache had gone but the tingling
had increased.  She contacted a recompression facility and
was advised to attend for examination.  She received three
sessions of recompression therapy spanning three days.  This
diver was to be tested for a PFO.
April 2000 00/291
After surfacing from a 30m dive for 20 mins, including stops at
6m, a diver took a mouthful of salt water and began coughing
up blood. He was airlifted to a hyperbaric unit for treatment.
(Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/146
Three divers completed a dive to 23m for 20 mins and they
planned a safety stop of 3 mins at 6m.  During the ascent, at
10m, the mask of one of the divers flooded and he was unable
to clear it.  He felt that he was swallowing water through his
regulator and swapped to his alternative air source.  This felt
the same and he took the alternative air source of one of the
other divers.  After two breaths he spat this out and, panicking,
swam to the surface.  On the surface he signaled distress and
was recovered into the boat.  He had no symptoms and was
returned to the shore.  During the journey he felt unwell and,
once ashore, was placed on oxygen.  He developed a slight
pain in his neck.  A Coastguard happened upon the group and
arranged for a helicopter to take this diver to a recompression
facility.  A possible DCI was diagnosed and the diver was
recompressed.  His symptoms were resolved.
April 2000 00/295
Following a first dive to 58m for 35 mins, a diver surfaced from
his second dive of the day to 38m for 20 mins (3 hour surface
interval). Shortly afterwards he developed a skin rash and was
taken to a hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/297
Two divers lost the shotline on a 30m wreck dive. One
deployed his SMB while the other lost his weightbelt and made
a rapid ascent. He surfaced with pains in the knees and was
airlifted to a hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/116
Two divers completed a dive to 36m for a total of 32 mins,
including a 2 mins stop at 6m.  20 mins after surfacing one of
the pair started to lose feeling in his legs.  A DCI was
diagnosed and the diver was given recompression treatment.
Subsequently he was detained overnight, in hospital, for
observation.
April 2000 00/115
A pair of divers was at a depth of 16m when one of them
experienced a problem with her regulator.  She made a fast
ascent to the surface, her buddy stayed underwater.  5 mins
later she re-descended and they dived to 20m.  At this point
she experienced a regulator free flow and made another rapid
ascent.  The buddy surfaced a few minutes later.  45 mins later
she noticed rashes on her hands, arms and chest.  A skin bend
was diagnosed and the diver was given recompression
treatment that resolved the problem.  She was taken to hospital
and discharged later that day.

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC -2000 11
April 2000 00/100
Two divers conducted a dive to 22m.  During the dive one of
the pair felt that her breathing was laboured and switch the
venturi control of her regulator to a more sensitive setting.  This
diver was using two cylinders with independent regulators and
she switched to the other cylinder after 18 mins.  After 22 mins
they prepared to ascend, and she used the now spare regulator
to inflate a delayed SMB.  Because the switch was still in the
sensitive position, the regulator began to free flow and could
not be stopped.  Whilst trying to resolve this problem the diver
became buoyant and was unable to prevent herself being
carried rapidly to the surface.  The buddy made a normal
ascent.  On the boat the diver breathed nitrox 36 for 1 hour.  No
symptoms were present.  The following day she was aware of
numbness and tingling in her left arm.  She sought medical
advice and was referred from hospital to a recompression
facility.
April 2000 00/101
A diver completed a dive to 29m for 26 mins with a 2 min stop
at 6m.  2 hours 45 mins she dived again to 23m.  The second
dive was a drift dive.  During this dive the diver encountered an
up current and was carried from 16m to the surface in less than
1 min.  Back in the boat she breathed oxygen as a precaution.
20 mins later she noticed numbness in her left hand and a
tingling and weakness in her right hand.  She was taken by
ambulance to hospital and then to a recompression facility.
She received a 5 hour treatment and her symptoms fully
resolved.
April 2000 00/303
A diver who made a fast ascent was taken direct to a
hyperbaric unit by her club.  Her buddy was also treated as a
precaution.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/302
Once ashore from a dive, a diver suffered pains in his
shoulders. Following medical advice, he was airlifted to a
hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/184
Two divers were conducting a dive to a maximum depth of
18m.  At 14m one of the pair began to feel dizzy and felt that
she was in danger of blacking out.  She held on to a rock and
her buddy came to assist.  The buddy brought her to the
surface using a controlled buoyant lift and they were recovered
into their boat.  The diver then complained of blurred and
double vision.  She was given oxygen and the boat returned to
shore from where the emergency services were contacted by
mobile phone.  When the ambulance crew arrived the diver was
unable to move and losing the ability to speak.  A doctor
examined the casualty and a helicopter was summoned to take
her to a recompression facility for treatment.  The buddy
experienced no adverse effects.
April 2000 00/306
Four deep dives in 2 days with inadequate stops, resulted in a
diver suffering chest pains. He was airlifted to a hyperbaric unit
for treatment.  (Coastguard & RNLI report)
April 2000 00/128
A diver completed a dive to 11m for 32 mins.  4 hours 20 mins
later she undertook a drift dive to a maximum depth of 12m.
Once back in the boat she noticed 'pins and needles' in her left
leg and foot.  The sensation then started in her right leg and
foot and in her hands.  She was placed on oxygen and the boat
returned to the shore.  The diver was taken to a recompression
facility.  A PFO test was planned.
May 2000 00/308
A diver surfaced from a 52m dive, missing stops, after getting
tangled in his buddy's SMB. He was airlifted to a hyperbaric
unit suffering from pains in his elbow.  (Coastguard report).
May 2000 00/307
A wreck diver surfaced with DCI. The diver was transferred to a
hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
May 2000 00/105
A diver completed a dive to 11m for 35 mins with a 2 min stop
at 6m.  1 hour 40 mins later he dived again to 26m for 33 mins
with a 4 min stop at 6m.  6 weeks earlier the diver had suffered
from a bad attack of flu.  The afternoon after the dive he
noticed a tingling in his left hand.  The following night he
experienced severe stomach cramps.  The following day his left
hand was tingling and numb.  The next day it had spread up his
arm and he noticed symptoms in his right hand.  He sought
medical advice and received two sessions of recompression
treatment that fully resolved his symptoms.
May 2000 00/311
A diver made a rapid ascent and surfaced in a poor condition,
described as vomiting, blood from the nose then not breathing.
He was airlifted to hospital and then to a hyperbaric unit where
he was treated for a burst lung. His buddy was later treated in
hospital.  (Coastguard report).
May 2000 00/313
The second dive of the day to 15m ended with a rapid ascent
and severe headache. The diver was airlifted to a hyperbaric
unit.  (Coastguard report).
May 2000 00/107
A dive to 25.1m for 27 mins ended in a rapid ascent from 15m.
The diver suffered tingling and joint pain.  He was airlifted to a
hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report)
May 2000 00/145
A diver completed a dive to 22m for a duration of 35 mins
including a 1 min stop at 6m.  That evening he noticed an area
of irritation on his left forearm.  The following morning a blotchy
red rash had appeared and he contacted a recompression
facility.  Three skin bends were noted and he was
recompressed.  This resolved all but one of the problems.  The
remaining rash finally disappeared 10 days later.
May 2000 00/118
Two divers completed a dive to 30m for a total duration of 34
mins.  6 hours 30 mins later they dived again to 29m for 29
mins including a 5 min stop at 6m.  The afternoon of the
following day one of the pair experienced shoulder pains.  This
was initially thought to be muscular but the condition worsened
overnight.  Medical advice was sought and both divers were
examined.  The diver with symptoms was recompressed but
this did not resolve the problem.  It was concluded that either
the problem was muscular or that too long had passed before
treatment was given.

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000
12 ©BS-AC - 2000
May 2000 00/155
Three divers undertook a dive to a maximum depth of 27m.  All
of these divers were using twin cylinders.  One of the group had
twin 10l cylinders one with 80 bar and the other with 160 bar.
After about 25 mins this diver used the last of the air in one of
his cylinders to send a lifting bag to the surface and started to
breathe off the other cylinder.  At 28 mins his second cylinder
ran out and he switched to his 3l pony cylinder.  At this point his
computer indicated a 4 min stop at 3m.  At 29 mins they started
their ascent.  At 8m this diver ran out of air.  He signaled that
he was out of air to his two buddies, who were 4m below him.
He re-descended to his buddies and took the spare regulator
from one of them.  A 5 min stop was now indicated.  At this
point buoyancy control was lost and both divers were carried to
the surface.  The computer of the diver who had run out of air
indicated that 12 mins of decompression stops had been
missed; the other diver had missed 6 mins of stops.  The third
diver completed his stops.  The diver who had run out of air
was placed on oxygen and the boat returned to the shore.  20
mins after the oxygen was finished the diver noted a tingling
sensation on the top of his left hand.  Medical advice was
sought and a spinal DCI was diagnosed.  The diver received
two sessions of recompression treatment that resolved his
symptoms.  No symptoms were reported by the other divers
and they were not recompressed.
May 2000 00/314
A diver surfaced with suspected DCI, he was conveyed to a
hyperbaric unit once the dive vessel docked.  (Coastguard
 report).
May 2000 00/315
Portland Coastguard received a mayday broadcast. A diver had
surfaced from a 34m dive for 25 minutes and was paralyzed on
one side. He was airlifted to a hyperbaric unit by Coastguard
Helicopter.  (Coastguard report).
May 2000 00/316
A diver had dived a total of 5 dives to 23m (max) in 6 hours.
The result of his endeavours was back, shoulder and hip pain
plus tingling in the hands and forearm. He was taken by lifeboat
to a hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
May 2000 00/317
A diver surfaced with suspected decompression sickness. She
was taken to hospital by ambulance.  (Coastguard report).
May 2000 00/130
A diver dived to 52m for 19 mins.  He stopped at 20m for 4
mins but missed the other stops.  He was airlifted to a
hyperbaric unit for precautionary treatment.  (Coastguard
report)
May 2000 00/323
Two divers dived to 36m for 37 mins. They made a fast ascent
from 17m. One suffered decompression sickness and was
airlifted to a hyperbaric unit. The buddy was later taken to the
unit by car.  (Coastguard report).
May 2000 00/320
A diver dived to 36m but missed a stop at 3m. He surfaced with
pain to his shoulder so he was taken to a hyperbaric unit by
lifeboat.  (Coastguard & RNLI report)
May 2000 00/141
A pair of divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 36m.
30 mins into the dive they were on an underwater rock wall at a
depth of 22m.  At this point one of the divers was too buoyant
and struggled to dump air from his BCD.  His buddy attempted
to assist and saw air leaving the jacket.  The buoyant diver was
carried upwards and his buddy hung on attempting to dump air
from his own BCD.  At 9m the second diver saw that his
computer indicated that a 4 min stop was required and he
released the buoyant diver, who was carried to the surface.
The second diver descended to 18m and then re-ascended to
6m to complete his stops.  He could see the buoyant diver
hanging on to the SMB at the surface.  At the surface both
divers then swam to the boat and climbed aboard.  The
buoyant diver had no symptoms.  Oxygen was available but its
use was discouraged, by the skipper, because of the
inconvenience of getting it refilled.  The following day the
buoyant diver experienced mild symptoms of DCI and was
recompressed.
May 2000 00/325
A diver with DCI was transferred to a hyperbaric unit by
lifeboat.  (Coastguard report).
June 2000 00/150
A diver was 20 mins into a dive at a depth of 37m.  He became
separated from his buddy in poor visibility and got tangled in
some line.  He cut himself free and made a rapid ascent to the
surface.  At the surface he showed symptoms of DCI and the
Coastguard was alerted.  A lifeboat and helicopter were tasked
to assist and he was given oxygen and flown to a
recompression facility for treatment.  (Newspaper report only)
June 2000 00/157
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 37m and
were ascending when one of the pair became inverted.  The
other diver went to assist him and, despite trying to make
himself heavy, was unable to prevent them from being carried
to the surface.  The dive had been a 'no stop' dive but they
went from 28m to the surface in less than 1 min.  The divers
were recovered into the boat and the inverted diver placed on
oxygen.  Another boat from the same party came to assist and
the buddy was also placed on oxygen.  The buddy noticed a
tingling and numbness in his fingers and forearm.  The
Coastguard was alerted and the boats returned to shore to be
met by an ambulance.  The buddy's symptoms worsened; he
developed a dull ache in his shoulder.  They were taken to a
recompression facility and examined.  The buddy had reduced
power in his limbs, felt somewhat confused, and had poor
balance.  Both divers were given two recompression
treatments, and the buddy required a further three days of
treatment.  This diver was left with residual symptoms of
extreme tiredness and short-term memory loss.  A spinal and
cerebral DCI was diagnosed.
June 2000 00/139
Three divers conducted a dive to 19m.  At the end of the dive
they deployed a delayed SMB.  The reel jammed and the diver
holding it was dragged upwards.  The dive leader grabbed hold
of this diver and attempted to stop the ascent.  In the confusion
the dive leader's glove fouled the reel lanyard and both were
dragged up to 3m within 1 min.  The dive leader got no
response to her signals to the other diver and decided to
ascend to the surface.  Total dive time was 31 mins.  The third
diver made a normal ascent.  4 mins of decompression were
missed.  The divers who had made the rapid ascent were
placed on oxygen and one of them complained of 'pins and
needles'.  The boat's radio was found to be malfunctioning so

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC -2000 13
they returned rapidly to the shore and then contacted the
Coastguard.  Both divers were taken by helicopter to a
recompression facility where the diver with symptoms was
recompressed.  Both divers fully recovered.  The diver using
the reel was unfamiliar with it and the trigger of the reel could
jamb on the ratchet if depressed too far.  The radio malfunction
was traced to a faulty microphone.
June 2000 00/331
A 22m dive for 21 mins on the James Egan Layne was spoilt by
a rapid ascent and subsequent chest pains. The diver was
airlifted to a hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
June 2000 00/332
A diver made a rapid ascent and suffered nausea and tingling
of the extremities. He was taken to hospital, where he was later
airlifted to a hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
June 2000 00/148
A diver suffering from a suspected DCI was airlifted to a
recompression facility for treatment.  (Newspaper report only)
June 2000 00/335
A diver made a rapid ascent from 25m after she became
tangled in a SMB. She surfaced feeling sick, dizzy and with
tingling hands. She was airlifted to a hyperbaric unit.
(Coastguard report).
June 2000 00/336
A diver dived to a depth of 23m for 25 mins. He made a normal
ascent to 6m for a decompression stop, but his air ran out. His
reserve air failed to function so he made a rapid ascent. This
resulted in dizziness and general malaise, so he was airlifted to
a hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
June 2000 00/171
Two divers conducted a wreck dive in a maximum depth of
34m.  Both divers were using nitrox 32.  After 20 mins they
prepared to ascend.  They attempted to deploy a delayed SMB
but it became detached from the line.  They attached a second
SMB and released it.  The reel then jammed and started to
drag the diver holding it to the surface.  This diver was reluctant
to release the reel as they planned to conduct decompression,
and she also hoped that it would become free.  Her buddy took
hold of her to try to prevent an uncontrolled ascent, but was
also carried up.  At 20m the buddy let go and made a normal
ascent that included a 3 min stop at 6m.  The diver with the reel
was carried directly to the surface.  She was recovered into the
boat and placed on oxygen.  The Coastguard was alerted and
the casualty was taken by helicopter to a recompression facility
for treatment.
June 2000 00/153
A diver suffering from DCI was given recompression treatment.
(Newspaper report only).
Decompression data source analysis
0 20 40 60 80 100
RNLI
Newspaper
BSAC Reports
Coastguard
June 2000 00/194
A diver completed a dive to 48m.  He started his ascent after
20 mins.  He stopped for 10 mins between 14 and 6m and then
for 30 mins at 5m.  He competed 3 mins more decompression
than indicated by his computer and 8 mins longer than
indicated by his buddy's computer.  At the surface he
experienced extreme fatigue and rested for the remainder of
the day.  5 to 6 hours after the dive his legs became numb and
he attended hospital where he was placed on oxygen for 4
hours; this resolved his symptoms.  The following evening he
lost all feeling in his right foot.  He contacted a recompression
facility and received two sessions of treatment.  His buddy, who
had decompressed on nitrox, exhibited no symptoms.
June 2000 00/343
A diver surfaced after a 66m dive and suffered visual
disturbances. She was airlifted to a hyperbaric unit for
treatment.
  (Coastguard report).
June 2000 00/347
After completing a normal dive to 32m for 32 mins (with a 4 min
stop at 6m), a diver developed slurred speech and dizziness
some 10 mins later. She was airlifted by Coastguard helicopter
to a hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
June 2000 00/195
A diver made a dive to 36m for a duration of 32 mins including
5 mins of decompression stops at 3m.  3 hours later he dived
again to 30m for a total of 25 mins.  An indicated stop of 1 min
at 3m had cleared by the time he had ascended to 20m.  A few
hours later he experienced a mild ache in his upper right arm.
The condition worsened during the night and he contacted a
recompression facility early the next morning.  He received four
sessions of recompression treatment that fully resolved his
symptoms.
July 2000 00/356
The same dive charter vessel as in DTG 021101 (00/354) had
a third casualty of the morning when a diver surfaced from a
29.1m/10 min dive, with a skin bend and tingling sensations.
He was airlifted to a hyperbaric unit as well.  (Coastguard
report).
July 2000 00/354
A diver dived to 28m for 8 mins and then panicked as she
claimed she could not breathe. Despite her buddy’s attempts to
control the ascent, both made a rapid ascent and displayed

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000
14 ©BS-AC - 2000
signs of DCI. Both were airlifted to a hyperbaric unit.
(Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/167
A diver was 15 mins into a trimix dive, at a depth of 87m.  At
this point the zip of his drysuit failed and water entered the suit.
The diver had planned for 20 mins bottom time with an overall
dive time of 127 mins.  Realizing that he would not be able to
survive the cold for long he made an ascent up the shotline.  At
41m he stopped for 1 min and switched to nitrox 37.  He
stopped at 36m for 1 min and then at 33m for a further minute.
He stopped at 20m for 2 mins and again at 16m for 2 mins.  He
switched to nitrox 80 and made stops at 12 and 6m.  At the
surface he was recovered into the boat and assisted out of his
drysuit.  He changed into warm clothes and then collapsed,
passing in and out of consciousness.   The Coastguard was
alerted and a lifeboat and helicopter were launched to assist.
The casualty was transferred into the lifeboat and then airlifted.
The helicopter stopped on its way to a recompression facility to
collect a doctor.  The diver had to be taken further than normal
because the closest recompression facility was occupied as the
result of an earlier diving incident.  The casualty spent 4 days in
the recompression chamber and made a good recovery.
July 2000 00/230
A diver completed a series of three dives; 10m for 26 mins,
36m for 27 mins, and 14m for 27 mins.  6 to 7 hours later he
felt a pain in his back and neck and some tingling in his hands.
He sought medical advice and received recompression
treatment.  This resolved his symptoms.
July 2000 00/173
Two divers suffered symptoms of DCI having surfaced missing
10 mins of decompression stops.  They were airlifted to a
recompression facility.  Both divers were recompressed.  One
of the pair required a further session of treatment.  It is reported
that they were out of air.
July 2000 00/361
A rapid ascent from a 37m/25 min dive resulted in a 'pins and
needles' sensation in the hands. This diver and his buddy were
taken to hospital by ambulance.  (Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/221
Two divers conducted a wreck dive to a maximum depth of
51m.  One of the pair had forgotten his computer and so
borrowed a set of IANTD tables.  Prior to the dive he forgot to
connect his drysuit direct feed and to put on his weightbelt.
During the descent, at 18m, he suffered from suit squeeze and
his buddy connected the direct feed hose.  At the bottom he put
a rock in his drysuit pocket to compensate for the missing
weightbelt.  After 20 mins at a depth of 44m he deployed a
delayed SMB.  In doing so he lost the rock from his pocket and
started to ascend uncontrollably with his buddy.  The buddy
took the SMB reel, swam back down to the wreck and tied the
reel to the wreck.  This allowed them to control their ascent.
They took 4 mins to get to 12m.  At 12m the buoyant diver let
go of the line to switch to a nitrox 80 decompression gas.  He
was carried to the surface.  The buddy deployed his delayed
SMB and completed 41 mins of stops as indicated by his
computer.  Total dive time 72 mins.  The buoyant diver was
recovered into the boat.  He breathed nitrox 80 until oxygen
was made ready, he then breathed oxygen.  He complained of
a pain in his right elbow.  The Coastguard was contacted and
the diver airlifted to a recompression facility for treatment.  No
subsequent ill effects were experienced.
July 2000 00/243
A pair of divers completed a 21 min dive to a depth of 43m,
including a 2 mins decompression stop at 3m.  Shortly after
surfacing one of the pair experienced a severe stomach pain
and was placed on oxygen.  The Coastguard was alerted and
they were advised to monitor the casualty.  5 mins later he
started to develop 'pins and needles' in his feet and a lack of
feeling in his legs.  The Coastguard was contacted again and
the casualty and his buddy were airlifted to a recompression
facility.  The casualty received a 7 hour recompression
treatment.  The buddy showed no symptoms of DCI and was
not recompressed.  He was, however, treated for a sprained
ankle which he sustained when jumping from the helicopter.
July 2000 00/365
Three dives the previous day, two to 30m and one to 17m, plus
a 32m dive the next day, led to numbness and weakness in the
legs. This diver was admitted to a hyperbaric unit for treatment.
(Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/367
The Coastguard was called on VHF radio by a commercial dive
boat reporting a diver with suspected DC1. A lifeboat
transferred the casualty ashore for onward passage to a
hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard & RNLI report)
July 2000 00/202
A diver completed a dive to 7m for 12 mins.  20 mins later she
dived again to 8m for 17 mins.  90 mins after the second dive
she experienced a tingling in the fingers of her left hand.  A few
hours later the symptoms remained and she sought medical
advice.  DCI was considered improbable but she received two
sessions of recompression treatment.  Some residual tingling
remained and further medical examination was planned.  This
diver had suffered a DCI 3 months earlier (Report 00/100).  A 6
week lay off from diving had been recommended.  These were
the first dives since the earlier DCI incident.
July 2000 00/368
A diver made a rapid ascent from a 34.6m/41 min dive. He
complained of difficulty breathing, pain in the chest and a
'bubbling' sensation in the lungs. He was met ashore by an
ambulance and taken to hospital and then onwards to a
hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/370
This diver had made 3 dives on this day, the previous 2 to 12m
and the third to 15m. He made a rapid ascent, and later
developed joint pain and pins and needles. He was admitted to
a hyperbaric unit for treatment.  (Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/371
A rapid ascent from 22m caused this diver to lose
consciousness on the surface. He regained consciousness and
complained of severe head pain. He was airlifted to a
hyperbaric unit for treatment. It is alleged that this diver was
awaiting surgery for a heart complaint, and his neck seal on his
new drysuit was far too tight.  (Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/217
Three divers all reported suffering from vomiting, headache and
tingling sensations following a dive (profile unknown).  They
were airlifted to a hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report)
July 2000 00/237

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC -2000 15
Three divers commenced a dive to a maximum depth of 22m.
Some time into the dive they entered an area of fast moving
water between two rock formations.  Realizing that they had
moved into a current one of the divers deployed a delayed
SMB.  The SMB caused this diver to move at a different speed
and he was carried away from the others.  This single diver
made a safe ascent to the surface and was recovered into a
boat.  The two remaining divers were carried down to 22m and
then, despite their efforts to regain control, were swept up to
the surface in 40 seconds.  At the surface one of the divers was
briefly unconscious and her buddy inflated her BCD.  They
were recovered into their boat.  The diver who had been
unconscious had a severe headache, and the other had slight
'pins and needles'.  Both divers were given oxygen and they
were taken ashore.  The Coastguard was alerted and two
ambulances and two helicopters arrived.  All three divers were
taken to hospital.  After examination two were released but the
diver with the headache was taken on to a recompression
facility where she received treatment for 5 hours.
July 2000 00/375
A diver surfaced from a 48m dive and had missed all stops. He
suffered pains in the elbow. Whilst the Coastguard helicopter
was en-route, another diver surfaced and reported missing 15
mins of stops from his 47m dive. Both divers were airlifted to a
hyperbaric unit for treatment.  (Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/379
A 75m tri-mix wreck dive for 25 mins ended with a free ascent
and missed stops. The diver surfaced, but had lapsed into
semiconsciousness after 10 mins. He was evacuated to a
hyperbaric unit by RN helicopter.  (Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/378
A diver with DCI was airlifted to a mainland hyperbaric unit by
Coastguard helicopter.  (Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/216
Two divers suffering from DCI were airlifted to a recompression
facility for treatment.  (Newspaper report only)
July 2000 00/380
A diver with suspected DCI on St Kilda was airlifted, by
Coastguard helicopter, to a mainland hyperbaric unit for
treatment.  (Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/222
A diver completed a dive to 30m for 30 mins, including a 1 min
safety stop at 6m.  1 hour 49 mins later he dived again to 24m
for 30 mins including a 1 min safety stop at 6m.  1 hour after
the second dive he began to feel a cramp like pain across his
abdomen.  He then developed a numbness and tingling in his
upper left leg, the sole of his left foot and his toes.  He was
placed on oxygen.  After 10 mins the symptoms had
diminished.  The boat headed back to the shore and the
Coastguard was alerted.  Medical advice was provided by radio
and the oxygen administration was stopped.  On arrival on
shore all symptoms had resolved.  The diver was monitored for
further symptoms and none were experienced.
August 2000 00/387
Type 2 DCI struck 5 mins after surfacing from the second dive
of the day. This diver, and his buddy (who was OK, but had the
same dive profile) were airlifted to a hyperbaric unit. His first
dive was to 36m for 60 mins and the second dive to 27m for 25
mins (incl. stops).  (Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/384
A diver with DCI was transferred ashore by two lifeboats in
relay and taken to a hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/209
A diver using nitrox 27 conducted a dive to a maximum depth
of 44m.  After 10 mins, at 35m, he deployed a delayed SMB.  A
1 min stop was conducted at 20m, followed by a 4 min stop at
6m on nitrox 53.  He surfaced with a total dive duration of 20
mins.  On surfacing he felt unwell and dizzy.  He was placed on
oxygen.  20 mins later he was still feeling unwell, dizzy and
tired.  The Coastguard was alerted and the casualty taken by
helicopter to a recompression facility.  He received a 6 hour
treatment which resolved his symptoms.
August 2000 00/236
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 30m.
They started their ascent after 26 mins.  They arrived at 6m
after 27 mins, where they conducted a 4 min decompression
stop.  Their total dive time was just over 32 mins.  6 hours later
one of the pair noted a pain in his right triceps.  The following
morning the pain had gone but it returned within 1 hour.  He
sought medical advice and attended a recompression facility.
He was recompressed and this resolved the symptom.
August 2000 00/390
A dive to 24m for 37 mins resulted in a diver seeking medical
attention after a 'pins and needles' sensation in the forearm
 was felt the next day.  (Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/226
A diver conducted a dive to 29m for a duration of 30 mins
which included a 3 min decompression stop at 6m.  Later this
diver complained of fatigue, dizziness, and pains in his
shoulder, elbow and ankle.  He was placed on oxygen and the
Coastguard alerted.  He was transported by lifeboat to a
recompression facility where he received a 6 hour treatment.
He responded well to the treatment and was kept in hospital
overnight for monitoring.
August 2000 00/392
4 dives in 2 days (depths unknown but reported not excessive)
with a rapid ascent on the last dive led to a neurological
embolism and evacuation to a hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard
report).
August 2000 00/213
Two divers were ascending from a 33m dive.  They planned a
first decompression stop at 9m.  At 9m one of the pair lost
control of his buoyancy and ascended rapidly to the surface. At
the surface he was given his buddy's pony regulator from which
he breathed nitrox 40.  He was recovered onto the boat and
placed on oxygen.  9 mins of decompression stops had been
missed.  The diver had a pain in his elbow.  He got out of his
diving suit and went to lay down in a cabin.  A recompression
facility was contacted by phone for advice.  The diver
developed a back pain.  The boat returned to harbour and the
diver was taken to the recompression facility.  Tests were
inconclusive and the diver was recompressed.  This treatment
resolved his symptoms.  He was given a check up the following
day, no further treatment was required.
August 2000 00/212
Two divers were ascending from a dive to 17m.  At 11m one of
the pair felt buoyant and dumped air from her BCD.  She was
still buoyant and attempted to dump air from her drysuit.  The

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000
16 ©BS-AC - 2000
dump valve would not allow air to be released and the diver
made a rapid ascent to the surface.  Her buddy made a normal
ascent.  At the surface the diver was towed ashore.  30 mins
later this diver experienced a tingling in her fingers.  1 hour later
she felt dizzy and had pain in her knees and elbow.  She
attended her local casualty department.  After a 40 min wait
she was placed on oxygen and given a chest x-ray.  She was
then sent by ambulance to a recompression facility where she
received treatment.  A full recovery was reported.
August 2000 00/232
A 70 year old diver surfaced from a 25m, 36 min dive.  He felt
unwell with tingling in his extremities and was airlifted to a
 hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report)
August 2000 00/228
A diver completed a 31 min dive to 31m including a 4 min stop
at 6m.  1 hour 22 mins later she dived again.  At the start of this
second dive her buddy suffered a drysuit leak at 6m and they
returned to the surface.  They then dived to 11m and after 22
mins they started to ascend.  The buddy was unable to control
his drysuit buoyancy and became inverted.  The first diver
attempted to help and they ascended quickly to the surface.  1
hour after the dive the first diver noted a numb feeling in her
right hand, fingers and toes.  5 days later the condition
remained and she was advised to seek medical help.  She
attended hospital and was placed on oxygen which alleviated
the symptoms.  She was then taken by air ambulance to a
recompression facility where she received a 5 hour treatment.
August 2000 00/394
A 59 yr old diver with DCI was airlifted to a hyperbaric unit for
treatment.  (Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/397
A 38m dive for 23 mins resulted in this diver suffering from arm
pains. He was evacuated to a hyperbaric unit for treatment.
(Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/211
A diver conducted a dive to 37m for 30 mins.  He developed a
numbness in his lower body.  He was placed on oxygen and the
Coastguard alerted.  Once ashore he was taken by ambulance
to a helicopter and airlifted to a recompression facility.
(Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/399
A rapid ascent from 54m following a bottom time of 30 mins
resulted in DCI and evacuation to a hyperbaric unit.
(Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/233
Two divers conducted a dive to 27m.  They left the bottom after
29 mins and made a slow ascent conducting a 5 min stop at
5m of which 3 mins was a safety stop.  They surfaced with a
total dive time of 43 mins.  40 to 60 mins after the dive, one of
the pair noted a small rash on her arm.  Medical advice was
sought and the diver was recompressed.  After 20 mins the
symptom had resolved.  This diver had suffered a skin bend 3
years earlier.
August 2000 00/400
A diver had completed a 60m dive for 20 mins, making a series
of stops. The casualty had been out of the water for 2 hours
before he suffered shortness of breath, dizziness and vomiting.
He was airlifted to a hyperbaric unit for treatment.  (Coastguard
report).
September 2000 00/406
A rapid ascent from 31m resulted in DCI. The diver was
transferred to a hyperbaric unit by ambulance.  (Coastguard
report).
September 2000 00/407
Following a weeks diving holiday, this diver reported being
unwell. She was transported to a hyperbaric unit for treatment.
(Coastguard report).
September 2000 00/246
A diver completed a 33 min dive to a depth of 29m with a 6 min
stop at 6m.  2 hours 41 mins later he dived again to 27m for 37
mins with a 4 min stop at 6m including an additional 2 min
safety stop.  On climbing back into the boat he felt a pain in his
back.  He had a history of back pain, however this was worse
than experienced before.  He sought medical advice and took
painkillers.  The following day the condition was unchanged
and he sought further medical advice.  A weakness was found
in his left leg and he received two sessions of recompression
treatment.  The treatment was effective for the leg weakness
but did not resolve the back pain.  This diver had had a DCI 20
years earlier.
September 2000 00/409
Following 4 dives in the previous 30 hours, this diver developed
a skin bend after a fast ascent from a 21m dive. He was
airlifted to a hyperbaric unit for treatment.  (Coastguard report).
September 2000 00/411
A diver reported feeling unwell with blurred vision as a result of
a 30m dive the previous day. She was taken to a hyperbaric
unit by ambulance.  (Coastguard report).
September 2000 00/414
A diver completed all stops correctly following a dive, but
experienced tingling extremities and a prickling sensation to her
skin. She was airlifted to a hyperbaric unit for treatment.
(Coastguard report).
September 2000 00/252
A diver completed a dive to 35m for 50 mins including a 7 min
stop at 6m.  4 hours 20 mins later he dived again, this time to
25m for 42 mins with a 3 min stop at 6m.  Early the following
morning he awoke with a pain from his shoulder to his elbow.
He sought medical advice and was successfully recompressed.
September 2000 00/418
A missed stop following a 52m dive for 50 mins resulted in this
diver suffering from blurred vision and tingling in the hands. He
was taken by lifeboat to a hyperbaric unit for treatment.
(Coastguard report).
September 2000 00/417
A 22metre/25 min dive was immediately followed by a 52m/10
min dive. The diver suffered DCI and was transferred to a
hyperbaric unit by lifeboat.  (Coastguard report).
September 2000 00/251
A diver made a normal ascent from 35m but suffered
discomfort in his stomach and leg.  The dive boat brought him
ashore where a hyperbaric unit ambulance met him.

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC -2000 17
(Coastguard report)

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000
18 ©BS-AC - 2000
Injury / Illness
October 1999 00/005
After a dive to 30m for 40 mins a diver suffered fatigue,
headache and stress.  He was sent to hospital as a precaution.
October 1999 00/004
A trainee had completed a 20 mins pool training session to a
maximum depth of 3m.  She left the pool by a ladder and was
seated being de-briefed when she lapsed into unconsciousness.
She was wrapped in towels and a space blanket and an
ambulance was called.  The casualty fluctuated between a
conscious and a semiconscious state.  She was confused, felt
numb and had difficulty focusing her eyes.  In hospital acute
malnutrition was diagnosed.  It was subsequently learned that
the casualty had not eaten for 15 hours, had completed a 12
hour working shift, and had had polio and yellow fever injections
prior to the pool session.
October 1999 00/014
Two divers dived to a wreck at a depth of 15m.  One of the two
was using a drysuit which she thought had a loose neck seal.
Once underwater, this diver also discovered that she was over
weighted.  During the ascent she was unable to use the
buoyancy of her suit since the air escaped through the neck
seal.  She used her BCD and this started a rapid ascent.  Her
buddy took hold of her and dumped the air from her BCD, this
caused them both to sink back to the seabed.  The buddy
suffered a burst eardrum during this descent since he did not
have a hand free to clear his ears.  They then made an ascent
to 6m and conducted a 3 mins safety stop.  Both divers arrived
safely at the surface and the injured diver went to hospital.
October 1999 00/008
A trainee was ascending from a depth of 34m after a dive of 10
mins.  On the way up she spat her regulator out.  The instructor
brought her to the surface, where she was assisted by a third
diver.  The diver was recovered from the water and given
oxygen.  She was briefly unconscious but quickly recovered.
She was taken to hospital but discharged after 3 hours.  No
further ill effects were reported.
October 1999 00/022
A trainee completed a dive to 15m for 30 mins.  One hour later
she started a second dive.  At 3m she experienced a problem
with her ears.  Trainee and instructor surfaced and she
complained of a pain in her left ear.  The following day she
underwent a medical examination and it was discovered that she
had a perforated eardrum.  The trainee was recovering from a
cold at the time of the dive.
November 1999 00/045
Two divers began a night dive.  At a depth of 18m one of the
pair blacked out.  Her buddy grabbed hold of another diver close
by.  This third diver brought the casualty to the surface; on the
way up the casualty's regulator fell from her mouth.  She was
recovered from the water and found to be shaken but unhurt.
She then revealed that she had a history of mild epilepsy.
December 1999 00/042
A trainee diver was 1 min into a dive at a depth of 6m when she
panicked.  She returned to the surface.  She was shaky and cold
and complained of chest pains.  An ambulance was called, but it
was decided that she did not need to go to hospital.  The diver
was unable to explain what had caused the problem.
December 1999 00/043
Three divers dived to 32m.  At this depth one of the group
started to shake uncontrollably.  One of the others saw the
problem and brought her to the surface using a controlled
buoyant lift.  All three surfaced safely and there were no
subsequent ill effects.  It is believed that the problem was due to
nitrogen narcosis.
December 1999 00/054
A diver was under instruction using a rebreather.  At 22m, 31
mins into the dive, this diver started to convulse.  The instructor
brought him to the surface.  The convulsions continued.  The
diver was taken to hospital and discharged later that day.  It is
thought that there was a problem with oxygen readings on the
rebreather.
February 2000 00/074
After a normal dive to a maximum depth of 22m for 26 mins, a
diver reported that he had had a minor pain in his neck during
the dive and that he was suffering from 'pins and needles' in his
neck and spine.  He was checked for DCI at the time and one
hour later.  No problems were identified.
March 2000 00/076
Two divers ascended after a 25 min dive to 15m.  At the surface
one of the pair felt his ear 'pop'.  He is believed to have
damaged his ear.
March 2000 00/070
A diver conducted a controlled buoyant lift as part of his training
programme.  The diver acting as the casualty was wearing a
drysuit with a cuff dump.  The lift was conducted with her BCD
and no air was dumped from the suit.  The 'casualty' attempted
to dump air from the cuff dump but none escaped.  They made a
fast ascent from 23 to 13m where the ascent slowed.  Control
was lost again at 10m and the divers made a buoyant ascent to
the surface.  1 hour 12 mins later the diver who had been acting
as the casualty dived again.  She spent 10 mins at 20m, 10
mins at 10m and 8 mins at 6m.  On surfacing she reported a
burning sensation in her fingers and 'pins and needles'.  50 mins
later half of her right hand was numb and tingling.  She was
given oxygen and medical advice was sought.  They were
advised to keep the casualty warm and monitor her for a further
30 mins.  Feeling gradually returned to her hands and it was
concluded that the symptoms were the effects of cold.  The cuff
dump had worked correctly during the second dive.
March 2000 00/078
A diver was kitting up for a rebreather training course.  He was
wearing a drysuit, became over heated, and fainted.  No
subsequent ill effects were reported.
March 2000 00/079
A trainee diver made a stride entry into the water.  She then
panicked and fainted.  No subsequent ill effects were reported.
March 2000 00/077

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC -2000 19
A diver experienced 'pins and needles' in his foot after a dive to
7m.  1 hour later the symptoms had gone.
April 2000 00/085
Three divers conducted a dive to 20m.  After 20 mins one of the
divers realized that he was using more air than normal and
signaled that he wanted to ascend.  They began their ascent,
during which this diver started to feel breathless and began to
ascend faster.  At the surface he was breathless and distressed.
He was recovered from the water and partially collapsed.  He
was given oxygen and made a fast recovery.  He had a residual
mild chest pain and was advised to contact his doctor.
April 2000 00/086
A diver sustained a very bad cut to her finger whilst using a
diving knife whilst out of the water.
April 2000 00/124
Two divers were conducting a dive to 18m.  After 15 mins one of
the pair developed a slight cough and was beginning to feel
cold.  She signaled that she wished to ascend.  At 6m she
experienced breathing difficulties and believed that she had
equipment problems.  She removed her regulator and purged it.
There was no problem with the equipment and she realized that
she had a medical problem.  At the surface she had great
difficulty breathing and her buddy towed her to the shore.  She
was given oxygen and taken to hospital.  Pneumonia was
diagnosed, she was given antibiotics and kept in overnight.  The
diver had taken Sudafed on the morning of the dive.  It was
suggested that compression on her lungs and her horizontal
position during the dive had caused mucus to push up into her
windpipe causing a blockage.  The diver subsequently made a
full recovery.
April 2000 00/288
A diver made an ascent from 25m but during this ascent he
became disoriented and faint. Upon surfacing he complained of
stomach pains and 'pins and needles' in his arms. He was taken
to hospital.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/292
A diver with chest pains was transferred to hospital by
ambulance.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/126
A trainee diver completed a dive to 7m for 36 mins followed by a
dive to 9m for 34 mins.  The following day he dived again to 19m
for 30 mins.  He reported no symptoms.  Eight days later this
diver met others to undertake a further dive.  He complained of
'pins and needles' in his knee.  Medical advice was sought and
the diver was advised to report to a recompression facility.  The
diver was given a precautionary recompression treatment, but it
was concluded that it was very unlikely that the problem was
diving related.
April 2000 00/099
A vehicle and trailer were being used to recover an RHIB from
the water after a dive.  As the tide was low, the vehicle was
driven higher up the slipway to gain traction and a rope was
used to connect to the trailer.  A man with a rowing dinghy on a
trailer asked the vehicle driver to move over so that he could get
past; this he did.  The dinghy user then tried to pass the RHIB
and trailer as it was being recovered.  He fell backwards from
the slipway and landed on a shingle beach.  He struck his head
and was knocked unconscious.  His dinghy collided with the
RHIB trailer, rolled off of its trailer and across the unconscious
man's legs.  The casualty was given oxygen and an ambulance
called to take him to hospital.  He was released after two nights.
He suffered shock and bruising and was unable to remember
the circumstances of the incident.
April 2000 00/296
A father and son were shore diving when on the ascent; the son
got stuck in underwater rocks and became distressed. The
father gave assistance, but son soon showed signs of
hypothermia. The son was airlifted to hospital.  (Coastguard
report)
April 2000 00/096
A diver was attempting to remove the safety wire from a boat
trailer when the towing vehicle was driven away.  The top of his
finger was severed.  The casualty was given first aid treatment
to control the bleeding.  The top of his finger was packed in ice
and taken with the casualty to hospital.  It was not possible to re-
attach the severed part.  The casualty was discharged that
evening.
May 2000 00/104
A diver entered the water from an RHIB to begin a wreck dive.
As she entered the water she landed on top of a shot buoy to
which were attached two smaller buoys on two pieces of rope.
She became entangled in this rope.  The rope also fouled one of
the propellers of the RHIB.  The diver realized that she was
being pulled towards the boat.  One of the propellers was
rotating although it was believed to have been out of gear.  She
shouted to the cox and the engines were stopped.  The propeller
struck her leg and she felt water enter her suit.  Other divers
helped her to free herself from the rope and she was recovered
into the boat.  Her leg was found to have been badly bruised and
there was damage to her drysuit, a torch, and a marker buoy
that had been in a leg pocket of the suit.
May 2000 00/310
An accident during a wreck dive resulted in a diver severing part
of his finger. He and his finger were transferred to hospital by
ambulance.  (Coastguard report).
May 2000 00/138
A trainee undertook a dive to 11m during which he was helped
to resolve a mask clearing problem.  Back at the surface he
complained of discharge from his ear, and when he attempted to
clear his ears air could be heard coming from the ear.  He
sought medical advice and a ruptured eardrum was diagnosed.
May 2000 00/436
Lifeboat launched to assist diver with illness.  Two persons
brought in.  (RNLI report)
May 2000 00/235
A trainee diver was conducting an 18m dive in a hired semi-
drysuit.  She became cold and signaled that she wanted to
ascend.  She later reported that she had developed a severe
headache and felt unable to breathe.  A delayed SMB was
deployed and a 4 min ascent was made.  At the surface this
diver was distressed, spat out her regulator and was sick.  She
was recovered into the boat and taken ashore.  Two medically
trained personnel examined her and hypothermia was
diagnosed.  She recovered after a warm shower.
June 2000 00/189
During a descent a diver experienced problems with his ears.  At

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000
20 ©BS-AC - 2000
15m he was unable to descend further and after 20 mins the
dive was terminated.  At the surface the diver experienced
problems keeping buoyant and called for assistance.  He was
found to be wearing an 11kg weightbelt and the mouthpiece of
his alternative air source was not correctly attached.
June 2000 00/152
A diver rolled into the water from his boat but struck his head
(possibly on the boat's stabilizer or propeller).  The diver was
taken to hospital by helicopter and ambulance.  (Coastguard
report)
June 2000 00/190
A diver was at 17m, 10 mins into the dive, when she was sick.
This caused her to panic.  Her buddy started to help but their
instructor brought her to the surface.  The last 3m of the ascent
was rapid.  At the surface she continued to be sick and there
were signs of blood in her vomit.  She was taken by ambulance
to hospital and retained overnight.  It was suggested that fish
eaten the night before may have been responsible for the
condition.
June 2000 00/441
Lifeboat launched to assist diver with illness. (RNLI report)
June 2000 00/170
A diver had attended a lecture during which she felt
uncomfortable as a result of high air temperature and the
brightness of the light from an overhead projector.  Later she
was carrying diving equipment along the side of a swimming
pool when she started to fit.  She was given first aid treatment.
The fit lasted for 3 mins.  The casualty was reported to have
suffered fits previously although not an epileptic.
July 2000 00/447
Lifeboat launched to assist diver with illness.  Dive boat brought
in, in adverse conditions.  (RNLI report)
July 2000 00/197
Two divers completed a dive to 36m for a duration of 26 mins.
After the dive one of the pair experienced 'pins and needles' in
his right wrist, then, 5 mins later, in his right knee and foot.  1
hour later his wrist had recovered but he still had a problem with
his knee and foot, and he sought medical advice.  He was
checked for symptoms of DCI but none were found.  The
symptoms resolved.
July 2000 00/359
A dive RHIB reported hitting a large wave and a
diver/crewmember had fallen and struck the transom causing
injury (including some lost teeth). An ambulance met them once
alongside and conveyed the casualty to hospital. The speed of
the RHIB at the time of the incident is unknown; the wind was
force 4.  (Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/362
A dive to 31m resulted in a ruptured eardrum and a trip to
hospital by ambulance. This diver’s profile was believed to be
normal.  (Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/364
A diver completed a normal 15m dive for 45 mins. On surfacing
he complained of chest pain and aching to the top of the arms.
He was airlifted to a hyperbaric unit, but was diagnosed as
suffering from a mild heart attack.  (Coastguard report)
July 2000 00/201
A diver completed a dive to 10m for 32 mins followed by a dive
to 7m for 10 mins.  After the second dive he was sick and had
no recollection of the dive.  There were no other apparent
abnormalities.  He was advised to contact his doctor.
July 2000 00/177
An instructor completed a training dive to 15m for 34 mins.
Afterwards he suffered a headache.  After an interval of 3 hours
he dived again to 12m for 21 mins, with a 1 min stop at 6m.
After the second dive he complained of headache and nausea.
He was placed on oxygen, given fluids, and medical advice was
sought.  He was taken to a recompression facility where he was
examined.  It was concluded that he was not suffering from DCI.
His condition slowly improved and he planned to return for a
final check up the following day.
July 2000 00/176
A trainee complained of a painful left ear following a sheltered
water lesson to practice assisted ascent and controlled buoyant
lift techniques.  She was examined by a doctor who referred her
to an ENT specialist.  The final diagnosis by the specialist was a
ruptured eardrum.
July 2000 00/204
20 mins into a dive to 21m a diver felt sick and aborted the dive.
15 mins later, having left the water, he was sick.  He had
completed three dives to 6m the day before.  He was given
oxygen.  The problem was not believed to be diving related.
July 2000 00/376
As 2 divers entered the water backwards off an RHIB they
clashed heads. One diver was later taken to hospital suffering
from suspected concussion.  (Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/381
A diver surfaced from a 30m dive with a nosebleed and
generally feeling unwell. Coastguard obtained medical advice.
No evacuation was necessary but the casualty was closely
monitored.  (Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/386
A dive to 22m for 30 mins led to a severe headache. Coastguard
obtained medical advice. Oxygen was administered but
evacuation to a hyperbaric unit was not considered necessary.
(Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/229
A diver dived to 6m where he experienced vertigo and aborted
the dive.  After the dive he was sick and felt unwell.  He felt dizzy
and had some pain in his ear.  He was advised to seek medical
opinion.
August 2000 00/398
Divers had been practicing rescue drills and had a 'yo-yo' dive
profile. One surfaced with a severe headache and vomiting. He
was taken to hospital by ambulance.  (Coastguard report).
September 2000 00/408
A call to assist one diver in pain with breathing difficulties turned
into a group of 4. They were all taken to hospital, but none

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC -2000 21
needed hyperbaric treatment.  (Coastguard report).
September 2000 00/248
A diver completed a number of dives, the last of which was to
32m for 56 mins with 8 mins of decompression stops.  Later that
evening he had a tight feeling in his stomach and was sick.  The
following morning he felt no better and sought medical advice.
Food poisoning was suspected but the casualty was given a
precautionary recompression treatment.  This did not resolve his
symptoms.
September 2000 00/416
A 148m wreck dive resulted in this diver being taken to hospital
suffering from reported symptoms of near drowning.
(Coastguard report).

NDC Diving Incidents Report -2000
22 ©BS-AC - 2000
Boating & Surface Incidents
October 1999 00/255
A dive RHIB with 4 POB broke down 12 miles south of
Stornoway. It was located and towed to Stornoway by the RNLI
lifeboat.  (Coastguard report).
October 1999 00/257
A dive boat became swamped, due to overloading, and a red
flare was fired. 2 divers were sub-surface at the time. A local
vessel recovered the dive boat and 5 occupants, whilst the 2 sub
surface divers were recovered by another diving boat. I have
recorded an overloaded dive boat as dangerous practice.
(Coastguard & RNLI report)
October 1999 00/420
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  (RNLI
report)
October 1999 00/421
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with steering problems.
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report)
October 1999 00/452
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report)
October 1999 00/261
A mobile phone call to Coastguard reported 3 divers some 1.25
hours overdue from a dive. They were found 2 miles from the
dive site by searching boats and a RNLI lifeboat. These divers
were reported FAR TOO LATE.  (Coastguard & RNLI report)
October 1999 00/422
Two lifeboats launched to assist dive boat with engine problems
and missing diver(s).  Three people landed and craft escorted in.
(RNLI report)
October 1999 00/263
A dive vessel suffered transmission failure with 5 divers down.
All divers were recovered by lifeboat which then towed the dive
vessel into port.  (Coastguard & RNLI report)
October 1999 00/264
A dive RHIB  with 4 POB, hit an underwater object and ripped
the bow section off. A Mayday was broadcast and the vessel
was recovered by a lifeboat. Classed as 'other'.  (Coastguard
report).
November 1999 00/024
Three divers completed a dive to 36m for 33 mins.  They
launched a delayed SMB and made their ascent.  The cox in
their cover boat was unable to start the engine, and the boat
was carried away from the divers.  The divers surfaced, swam to
a navigational buoy and hung onto it.  The cox alerted the
Coastguard.  A lifeboat and a military police boat came to their
assistance.  The divers were recovered into their boat and one
of these divers managed to restart the engine.  They were
escorted back to shore by the lifeboat.
November 1999 00/040
Six divers in a RHIB were returning from a dive when the boat
was swamped by a wave.  The boat was bailed out and the
engine restarted.  After a few minutes the engine stopped
running and could not be restarted.  They alerted the
Coastguard and a lifeboat was launched to assist them.  The
boat was towed ashore.  It was subsequently found that water
had entered the fuel tanks.
November 1999 00/036
With three divers in the water the throttle of an RHIB became
jammed and the cox was thrown into the water.  He fired a flare
which was seen by two fishing boats.  One of the fishing boats
recovered the cox.  The Coastguard was alerted and the cox
was airlifted to hospital suffering from hypothermia.  The three
divers were recovered by another fishing boat and returned to
their RHIB.  The divers were escorted back to the shore by a
lifeboat.  (Coastguard & RNLI report)
November 1999 00/266
A dive boat with 6 POB reported engine failure. It was towed in
by a RNLI Lifeboat.  (Coastguard report).
November 1999 00/423
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s), others
coped.  (RNLI report)
November 1999 00/039
A trainee was practicing picking up a buoy at slow speed when
the RHIB's propeller struck a sand bar.  This resulted in damage
to the propeller.
Analysis of boating & surface incidents
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Bad seamanship
Boat problems
Lost divers
Engine problems
December 1999 00/268
The public reported a dive vessel as sinking in adverse weather
conditions. It transpired that this RHIB, plus 2 others, were
carrying out diving 'frolics' and were in no danger.  (Coastguard
& RNLI report)
January 2000 00/270
A diver, with no surface detection aids, lost contact with his boat

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC -2000 23
and drifted on the surface for 12 miles before being found by a
RNLI Lifeboat.  (Coastguard report).
January 2000 00/271
A dive RHIB, with 2 POB, suffered engine failure and was towed
into port by another local boat.  (Coastguard report).
January 2000 00/069
Two divers planned a dive to 40m.  They planned to launch a
delayed SMB once they reached the seabed and instructed the
boat skipper to follow it.  They stated that they would have a
maximum dive time of 1 hour, and that they would drift to the
south.  At the end of their dive they completed 20 mins
decompression.  On surfacing they could see the boat in the
distance but could not attract its attention.  They were carried
out of sight around a headland.  They activated an EPIRB and
inflated three other delayed SMBs that they were carrying.  After
a wait of 3 hours 45 mins they were spotted by a searching
aircraft and picked up by a lifeboat.  Their boat's skipper had
waited 3 hours before raising the alarm.  Their SMB had not
remained at the surface and the skipper had lost sight of them.
The EPIRB did not
February 2000 00/424
Two lifeboats launched to assist dive boat with engine problems
and missing diver(s).  Three people landed and craft escorted in.
(RNLI report)
February 2000 00/067
On their way to a dive site, divers noticed another RHIB in
difficulties.  They went to their assistance and found that their
engine had failed.  They had an auxiliary engine but this would
not work either.  They took the boat in tow to bring them back to
shore.  On the way an RNLI boat came alongside for a while.
Once ashore they were met by the Coastguard.
March 2000 00/275
A dive boat with 4 POB suffered engine failure and was towed
into port by another local dive boat. (Coastguard report)
March 2000 00/072
Two divers entered the water for a dive to 14m.  The dive boat
lost contact with the divers' bubbles and the Coastguard was
alerted.  Two helicopters, two lifeboats and two other vessels
joined the search.  The divers were found at the surface 2 hours
later.  No subsequent ill effects were reported.  (Coastguard &
RNLI report)
March 2000 00/280
Two divers drifted on the surface for a mile after their surface
marker buoy failed and their dive support boat lost sight of them.
They were rescued by RAF helicopter and transferred to hospital
suffering from hypothermia.  (Coastguard report)
April 2000 00/286
A dive boat broke down with one diver in the water. A local
fishing vessel recovered the diver and towed the dive boat to
port.  (Coastguard & RNLI report)
April 2000 00/097
The engine of an RHIB failed whilst the passengers were
searching for a dive site.  The Coastguard was alerted and the
boat was anchored.  A lifeboat towed the craft back to the shore.
April 2000 00/294
A 999 call from a member of the public reporting divers in
distress. They had become separated from their dive boat,
which eventually picked them up.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/299
A dive boat with 6 persons on board broke down and was towed
in by a RNLI lifeboat.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/300
A member of the public rang 999 to report 2 divers in difficulties.
Both were recovered by the inshore lifeboat. The shore divers
had been swept out to sea by the strong tide.  (Coastguard &
RNLI report)
April 2000 00/301
A tender to a dive vessel with 3 divers onboard capsized in a
heavy swell.  All persons were picked up from the water by
another vessel.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/425
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with steering problems.
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report)
April 2000 00/426
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report)
April 2000 00/305
A RHIB reported 2 divers lost, and boat was unsure of its
position. Divers were eventually found once position was
established.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/304
Two shore divers got into difficulty after being swept out to sea
in a strong tide. Both were recovered by a passing local vessel.
(Coastguard & RNLI report)
April 2000 00/427
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report)
May 2000 00/309
A dive boat, with no communication equipment, raised the alarm
via a passing boat that they had lost two divers following a drift
dive. Following a surface search, the divers were located by their
own RHIB.  (Coastguard & RNLI report)
May 2000 00/429
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report)
May 2000 00/430
Two lifeboats assisted in the search for missing diver(s), others
coped.  (RNLI report)
May 2000 00/431
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  Others
coped.  (RNLI report)

NDC Diving Incidents Report -2000
24 ©BS-AC - 2000
May 2000 00/433
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat that was out of fuel.  Craft
and 5 crew brought in.  (RNLI report)
May 2000 00/432
Lifeboat launched to assist swamped dive boat.  Craft and 6
crew brought in.  (RNLI report)
May 2000 00/144
Two divers had completed a 25 min dive to 15m and were
conducting a 1 min stop at 6m under a delayed SMB.  An RHIB
passed over the SMB and the line was caught in its propeller.
The diver was dragged upwards for 2m before he released the
reel.  The SMB was recovered but the reel was lost.  The diver
suffered no subsequent ill effects.
May 2000 00/434
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report)
May 2000 00/437
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.
Craft escorted in.  (RNLI report)
May 2000 00/438
Two lifeboats launched to assist dive boat with engine problems
and missing diver(s).  Three people landed and craft escorted in.
(RNLI report)
Boating& surface incident report source analysis
12
61
53
3
BSAC Reports (12) Coastguard (61)
RNLI (53) Newspaper (3)
May 2000 00/439
Lifeboat assisted in the search for and recovered two missing
divers.  (RNLI report)
May 2000 00/322
MRSC Brixham was alerted to a dive boat that had broken
down. The boat was successfully re-started prior to rescue units
arriving.  (Coastguard report).
May 2000 00/321
A search for a missing diver ended when he was recovered by
another searching dive vessel. The diver was taken ashore by
lifeboat suffering from the effects of cold.  (Coastguard & RNLI
report)
May 2000 00/156
An RHIB was being used on its third dive trip of the day, having
been laid up for the winter.  Three pairs of divers entered the
water and the cox anchored the boat.  Each pair carried an
SMB.  One diver from the first pair had a drysuit problem and
the dive was aborted.  The cox buoyed the anchor to go to
recover them.  15 mins into their dive, one of the second pair
experienced problems with a stuck open drysuit inflation valve,
and the dive was aborted.  These divers were also recovered
into the boat.  The third pair completed their dive and surfaced
200m from the boat.  The boat engine then stopped and could
not be restarted.  The third pair swam to the boat.  The boat was
now drifting, without an anchor.  The divers were unable to
attract the attention of passing boats and contacted the
Coastguard by radio.  They had to use a hand held radio as the
radio on the boat had a seized volume control and would only
operate on channel 16.  A nearby yacht came to their assistance
and towed them into harbour.
June 2000 00/147
A pair of divers was missing after a dive.  The Coastguard was
alerted and a helicopter and lifeboat were launched.  The divers
were located and recovered.  It was then discovered that a
second pair were also missing, the search was resumed, and
the second pair were safely recovered.  (Newspaper report only)
June 2000 00/440
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report)
June 2000 00/326
A dive charter boat struck an underwater object and damaged
the propeller. The 8 divers aboard were transferred to another
vessel, whilst the dive boat was towed in by a lifeboat.
(Coastguard & RNLI report)
June 2000 00/329
A dive boat flooded its engine whilst changing fuel tanks. Whilst
temporarily out of action, the crew realized that 2 divers had
drifted away. The divers were later picked up by a yacht.
(Coastguard & RNLI report)
June 2000 00/327
A dive boat reported one diver 10 mins overdue, but recovered
the diver just as the helicopter arrived.  (Coastguard report).
June 2000 00/328
Following on from the above (00/327), and shortly afterwards,
this hapless party suffered engine failure in both engines and
the boat was swamped. 7 persons were rescued by Coastguard
helicopter whilst one remained on board and was escorted into
Portland harbour.  (Coastguard report).
June 2000 00/330
A dive boat with 4 POB suffered engine failure and was towed
into port by lifeboat.  (Coastguard report).
June 2000 00/333
A RHIB with 8 POB suffered engine failure. It was towed in by
lifeboat.  (Coastguard & RNLI report)

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC -2000 25
June 2000 00/455
A hard dive boat was reported to have been driven dangerously
close to other boats and divers in the water.
June 2000 00/334
Three pairs of divers were on a drift dive. Whilst recovering two
pairs the boat lost sight of the third who drifted off. Following a
search the two divers were found safe and well.  (Coastguard &
RNLI report)
June 2000 00/337
An element of confusion reigned when a dive boat reported 2
divers missing. Coastguard units were dispatched to search.
The lost divers were picked up by another dive boat. Shortly
afterwards, this hapless bunch reported losing 2 more divers. A
rescue helicopter was tasked to search this time. Fortunately,
the same dive boat rescued them again. The tide was reported
to have been setting at a rate of 2 knots. This lot found out the
hard way. It’s easier to check the tide tables beforehand.
(Coastguard & RNLI report)
June 2000 00/338
Following on from the above (00/337), another pair of divers
(from the safe group) were reported lost shortly afterwards. A
search involving a helicopter, lifeboat and Coastguard teams
was launched. Both divers were later found safe and well sitting
on some rocks. Who planned this fiasco?  (Coastguard report).
June 2000 00/137
Two divers completed a wreck dive in a depth of 31m.  In an
increasing current they deployed a delayed SMB to make their
ascent.  The SMB line became slack, the buoy was not held
vertically at the surface, and was not seen by the dive boat.  On
surfacing the divers could not see their boat.  They inflated a
second delayed SMB and waved a yellow flag.  The boat party
realized that the divers were missing and this boat and two
others began a search.  The divers were found after 45 mins at
the surface and safely recovered.
June 2000 00/339
A dive boat with 4 POB suffered engine failure. They were towed
11 miles into port by a lifeboat.  (Coastguard report).
June 2000 00/341
Two divers were reported as being missing. After a search
involving a RNLI inshore lifeboat, Coastguards and other
vessels, the divers were found safe and well by their dive boat.
(Coastguard & RNLI report)
June 2000 00/442
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.
(RNLI report)
June 2000 00/342
A search was initiated for an overdue shore diver. He was
located safe ashore but required medical treatment by air
ambulance staff for abdominal cramps.  (Coastguard report).
June 2000 00/444
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report)
June 2000 00/344
A diver surfaced about 0.75 mile from his dive boat. He was
found safe and well after a short search.  (Coastguard & RNLI
report)
June 2000 00/345
A dive RHIB with 8 POB capsized at the entrance to a harbour.
7 persons made the shore unaided whilst a RNLI lifeboat
rescued the remaining person and gave medical assistance.
(Coastguard report).
June 2000 00/346
A dive boat ran out of fuel and was towed into port by an inshore
lifeboat. There were 9 POB.  (Coastguard report).
June 2000 00/348
A dive boat with 9 POB suffered total engine failure. It was
towed in by an RNLI lifeboat.  (Coastguard & RNLI report)
July 2000 00/350
Coastguard began searching for a dive boat reported overdue. It
transpired that the dive boat had returned safely, but the divers
had forgotten to inform their shore contact, which quite rightly,
reported them missing.  (Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/351
A dive RHIB with 7 POB suffered engine failure and was towed
into port.  (Coastguard & RNLI report)
July 2000 00/160
Two pairs of divers entered the water from an RHIB to conduct a
drift dive in a depth of 25m.  The plan was that they would each
launch a delayed SMB 5 mins into the dive.  Unknown to the
boat cover one pair were dropped in a 1 to 2 knot current as
anticipated, but the other pair found themselves in still water.
The boat followed the moving buoy.  The pair in still water made
their way towards the shore but the boat party did not spot their
buoy.  The drift divers surfaced and were recovered after a 30
min dive.  A search was then made for the missing divers.  The
Coastguard was alerted and a lifeboat, a helicopter and other
local boats conducted a search.  The RHIB was low on fuel and
before returning to harbour went to the furthest point down
current and made a final search along the shore.  They found
the missing divers, safe and well, on shore, only 150m from their
entry point.  The search was called off and the divers were
checked by the helicopter crew and returned to the harbour.
July 2000 00/352
A dive boat with 6 POB reported engine failure. The dive boat
was towed into port by an RNLI inshore lifeboat.  (Coastguard
report).
July 2000 00/163
Two pairs of divers entered the water to conduct a dive.  One
pair were recovered after their dive, but the other pair were not
located.  The Coastguard was alerted and three lifeboats and a
helicopter were launched to search.  The divers were found 70
mins after the emergency call by the helicopter and safely
returned to shore.  The divers had surfaced 100m from their
boat but were not seen.  They were finally recovered two and a
half miles from their entry point.
July 2000 00/446
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat that was out of fuel.  Craft
towed in.  (RNLI report)

NDC Diving Incidents Report -2000
26 ©BS-AC - 2000
July 2000 00/358
Coastguard began to search for an overdue dive vessel; after a
short while it became clear that the divers had returned safely,
but had forgotten to make a scheduled call on their return.
(Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/448
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report)
July 2000 00/449
Two lifeboats assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  Others
coped.  (RNLI report)
July 2000 00/450
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report)
July 2000 00/366
A diver surfaced away from his dive vessel and drifted for 55
mins before being located by a searching fishing vessel, approx
1 mile from the dive site.  (Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/372
A dive boat with 7 POB suffered engine failure and was towed
into port by another dive vessel. A lifeboat also attended.
(Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/374
An RHIB reported engine failure and was unable to recover 2
divers. Both divers and RHIB recovered by inshore lifeboat.
(Coastguard & RNLI report)
July 2000 00/451
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.
Others coped.  (RNLI report)
July 2000 00/377
A RHIB called for assistance to locate 3 missing divers on a drift
dive. They were located and rescued by an inshore lifeboat.
(Coastguard & RNLI report)
August 2000 00/382
A hazardous incident report was generated after a dive charter
boat, after hurling abuse and profanities, proceeded to run over
a tender being towed astern of a private yacht, who accidentally
got too close to a SMB. No 'A' flag was reported as being seen.
Clearly an ambassador for the sport of diving!  A deliberate
close quarters situation must be classed as dangerous practice.
(Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/383
A dive charter vessel with 15 POB reported she was aground
and taking water. The divers were taken off by lifeboat, and the
stricken vessel was pumped out and later re-floated. Classed as
'other'.  (Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/385
A dive boat with 4 POB reported engine failure. It was towed into
port by a passing yacht.  (Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/389
A dive RHIB suffered engine failure with 2 divers down. Both
divers were recovered by lifeboat and the RHIB towed to port.
(Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/396
A dive RHIB with gearbox failure was towed into port by a local
vessel.  (Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/404
A pair of divers drifted away from their support vessel. They
were located by another vessel in the area.  (Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/403
A dive vessel with 5 POB reported engine failure. A local angling
boat towed it in.  (Coastguard report).
September 2000 00/240
Two divers were reported missing and a search was initiated
including a helicopter.  They were later found by their boat and
safely recovered.  (Newspaper report only).
September 2000 00/412
A diver was reported missing, but was later found safe and well
on the opposite side of the Loch.  (Coastguard report).
September 2000 00/413
A dive vessel broke down with 3 divers sub-surface on a
shotline. A lifeboat recovered the 3 divers and towed the dive
vessel into harbour.  (Coastguard report).
September 2000 00/415
A shore diver was swept away by a strong tide. He was spotted
by a passing boat and landed safely ashore.  (Coastguard
report).
September 2000 00/244
An RHIB with four divers and a cox onboard suffered an engine
failure and anchored just off a lee shore.  At one point they had
to use the boat's paddles to relay the anchor which was
dragging.  The Coastguard issued a 'Pan Pan' call.  A passing
pleasure boat towed them safely to harbour.
September 2000 00/247
A group of divers set off to dive in two inflatable boats.  At the
dive site four divers entered the water.  The engine of one of the
boats then failed.  The cox indicated that the other boat should
cover the divers and he then anchored the boat.  The engine of
the second boat then failed.  The Coastguard was alerted and a
lifeboat and other craft were tasked to assist.  The engine of the
second boat was then restarted and two of the divers were
recovered.  The other two were picked up by a fishing boat and
were believed, for a while, to be missing.  The boat with the
failed engine was towed back into harbour and all divers were
safely recovered.

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC -2000 27
Ascents
October 1999 00/254
Two divers presented themselves at a doctor’s surgery
reporting missing stops.  No symptoms were apparent at the
time.  Both were assessed by the doctor.  This incident is not
related to the previous one (00/253).  (Coastguard report).
October 1999 00/253
A diver surfaced and reported missing 14 mins of stops. He
was taken to hospital by ambulance for observation.
(Coastguard report).
October 1999 00/048
Two divers completed a dive to 35m for 34 mins.  During their
ascent they slowed down at 12m in preparation for a
decompression stop.  At this point one of the pair lost control of
his buoyancy and started to ascend.  His buddy attempted to
slow the ascent but was unsuccessful.  At 4m the buddy
stopped his attempts and re-descended to complete his stops.
The buoyant diver rose to the surface and gave the emergency
signal.  He was recovered into the boat.  His computer showed
13 mins missed decompression.  He showed no signs of DCI
but refrained from further diving.  At the end of the following day
he developed a back ache.  He sought medical advice and
received decompression treatment, there was no change to the
back ache and it was concluded that no DCI had occurred.
October 1999 00/020
Three divers completed a dive to 34m for 46 mins.  One of the
divers was under weighted and made a slightly fast ascent.  His
computer registered an ascent warning.  2 hours 9 mins later
they dived again, this time to 24m.  During their ascent one of
the three became tangled in fishing line and they descended to
27m whilst this problem was resolved.  They re-ascended and,
at 10m, the diver who had made the earlier fast ascent felt air
in the legs of his drysuit.  He attempted to clear this air by
turning a somersault but again found that he was under
weighted and made a second fast ascent to the surface.  His
total dive time on this second dive had been 31 mins.  On
reaching the surface he stopped to check that he was alright
and then swam ashore.   His two buddies made a normal
ascent.  Once ashore he noticed that part of his left hand was
numb.  He felt that this could have been due to a tight wrist
seal.  He removed his drysuit and placed himself on oxygen.
The numbness resolved after a few minutes.  No subsequent ill
effects were experienced.
October 1999 00/026
Two divers completed a 18 mins dive to a maximum of 32m.
They started their ascent when both computers were showing 1
min of no-stop time remaining.  During the ascent one of the
pair was unable to dump air from the wrist dump of his drysuit
and, despite his buddy trying to slow the ascent, they made a
rapid ascent to the surface.  At the surface both computers
showed missed stops.  The divers were recovered into their
boat.  One reported an ache in his knee and the other tingling
fingers of one hand.  They were placed on oxygen.  The
Coastguard was alerted and a lifeboat that was nearby on
exercise came to assist.
The divers were taken ashore by lifeboat and then flown by
helicopter to a recompression facility where they received
treatment.  It was concluded that neither diver had suffered
from DCI, and that their symptoms were from other factors.  It
was subsequently determined that the diver's undersuit, which
had a smooth surface, had sealed the wrist dump valve from
the inside, and that a mesh section, that had been fitted to the
undersuit to allow air to escape, did not align with the valve.
November 1999 00/044
A diver completed a dive to 35m.  During the ascent he lost
buoyancy control at 6m and came to the surface missing
planned stops.  His total dive time was 21 mins.  No
subsequent ill effects were experienced.
November 1999 00/265
A backside first, rapid ascent, led to a diver surfacing with
lacerated hands, nausea and later, shock. He was transferred
to a hyperbaric unit for treatment.  (Coastguard report).
November 1999 00/062
After a 25 min dive to a maximum depth of 23m a diver lost
control of his buoyancy and made a rapid ascent to the surface.
No subsequent ill effects were experienced.
December 1999 00/267
A dive to 29m for 9 minutes and a fast ascent from 15m led to
a diver being brought ashore and taken by ambulance to a
hyperbaric unit for checks. He was pronounced fit and well.
(Coastguard report).
January 2000 00/052
Two divers conducted a dive to 32m.   One of the divers lost his
weightbelt and they made a faster than normal ascent to the
surface.  The total dive time was 18 mins and no stops were
conducted.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced.
January 2000 00/057
After a dive to 18m for 20 mins two divers started their ascent.
One of the pair accidentally let air into his BCD, instead of
releasing it.  As a result he made a fast ascent to the surface.
No ill effects were reported.
February 2000 00/060
A diver was making her first dive in a drysuit.  12 mins into the
dive, at a depth of 21m, she experienced problems controlling
the dump valve and made a fast buoyant ascent to the surface.
No subsequent ill effects were experienced.
February 2000 00/073
A trainee and an instructor were 6 mins into a dive at a depth of
21m.  The trainee experienced a problem with his regulator
mouthpiece and panicked.  He made a fast ascent to the
surface.  No subsequent ill effects were reported.
February 2000 00/088
A diver under training, in a drysuit, made a dive to 15m.  6 mins
into the dive he lost control at a depth of 3m and ascended feet
first to the surface.  No subsequent ill effects were reported.
February 2000 00/087

NDC Diving Incidents Report -2000
28 ©BS-AC - 2000
A diver conducted a dive to 35m for a duration of 15 mins.  He
was using a different undersuit and experienced buoyancy
problems which resulted in a fast ascent to the surface.  No
subsequent ill effects were reported.
February 2000 00/075
9 mins into a dive, at a depth of 24m, one of a pair of divers
panicked and made a rapid ascent to the surface.  No
subsequent ill effects were reported
April 2000 00/181
A diver commenced her first dive of the year.  Once on the
seabed, at a depth of 14m, she allowed air into her BCD to
adjust her buoyancy.  The inflation valve stuck in and the diver
made an uncontrolled ascent to the surface.  Total dive time
was 4 mins.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced.  The
diver made no further dives that day.
April 2000 00/112
Two divers completed a dive to a maximum depth of 36m for a
total duration of 41 mins.  At 20m they lost control of their
buoyancy and made a rapid ascent to the surface, missing
decompression stops.  One of the pair pulled himself back
down to 6m and conducted 10 mins of decompression stops.
No subsequent ill effects were reported.
April 2000 00/133
A diver completed a wreck dive to a depth of 25m.  During the
ascent, at a depth of 18m, he lost control of his buoyancy and
made a rapid ascent to the surface in less than 1 min.  The
dive duration was 26 mins.  The diver was placed on nitrox 33
for 20 mins.  No symptoms were experienced and no
subsequent ill effects were reported.
April 2000 00/111
Three divers dived to 36m for a duration of 21 mins.  At 18m
they lost control of their buoyancy and all made a rapid ascent
to the surface missing a 3 min stop at 6m.  No subsequent ill
effects were experienced.
April 2000 00/183
Two divers were ascending from a dive to 20m.  At 9m one of
the pair lost control of his buoyancy and started to ascend.  He
took hold of the SMB line and both divers were carried to the
surface.  The buoyant diver had been trying to ascend in a
'prone' position, as he had mis-understood a conversation on
decompression and this resulted in air migrating throughout his
suit which he could not dump.  Both divers were placed on
oxygen and neither experienced
April 2000 00/094
Two divers completed a dive to a maximum depth of 28m for a
total duration of 40 mins.  They deployed a delayed SMB prior
to surfacing and made a normal ascent to 5m.  At this point one
of the pair felt herself becoming buoyant and was unable to
release air from her drysuit through the dump valve.  She was
carried to the surface missing an indicated 8 mins stops at 3m.
Her buddy became tangled in the SMB line and was also taken
to the surface.  The divers got back into their boat and were
placed on oxygen for a total of 1 hour.  They took hot drinks.
Neither diver felt any symptoms.  48 hours later they conducted
a shallow no stop dive.  No subsequent ill effects were
reported.
May 2000 00/109
Two divers were ascending from a depth of 35m.  Buoyancy
control was lost at 21m and they made a rapid ascent to the
surface.  Total dive duration 9 mins.  No subsequent ill effects
were reported.
May 2000 00/103
Two divers made a dive to 15m.  At this depth they found very
low visibility and decided to abort the dive.  They deployed a
delayed SMB.  One of the pair found himself to be too buoyant
and, despite his buddy's assistance, he made a rapid ascent
from 10m to the surface.  The buddy ascended normally.  At
the surface the diver who had made the rapid ascent
complained of an ear pain.  Subsequent medical examination
revealed a small perforation of the right eardrum.   This diver
commented that he had felt dizzy and disorientated during his
descent on this dive.  A full recovery was reported.
May 2000 00/318
A diver made a fast ascent from 39m after becoming entangled
in a buoy line, missing decompression stops. The diver did not
show signs of DCI but was taken to a hyperbaric unit for
observations. He was released after a few hours none the
worst for his experience.  (Coastguard report).
May 2000 00/319
A diver made a fast ascent from 40m. He was transferred to a
hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard & RNLI report)
May 2000 00/324
Two divers surfaced after missing a 13 minute stop at 6m. On
surfacing one suffered a bleeding nose. Both were given
oxygen and taken to a hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report).
June 2000 00/187
Two divers made a dive down an underwater cliff to a depth of
40m.  They had been at this depth for about 5 mins when their
computers indicated the need for decompression stops.  They
began their ascent.  At 20m one of the computers indicated the
need for 4 mins at 3m.  At 15m one of the pair switched to
nitrox 30.  The other diver was experiencing problems with
excessive buoyancy and his buddy took hold of him.  Despite
the buddy dumping air they were both carried to the surface.  At
the surface one of the computers was clear and the other
indicated 1 min of missed decompression stop.  One diver
breathed oxygen and the other breathed nitrox 30.  After 30
mins both divers reverted to breathing air.  No symptoms were
experienced.  The buoyant diver was using a new drysuit that
he had only used three times before.
June 2000 00/188
A diver was using hired diving equipment.  At 20m he got into
difficulties with his mask and felt that he couldn't breathe.  He
made a fast ascent to the surface with his buddy.  No
subsequent ill effects were experienced.
June 2000 00/169
Two divers conducted a wreck dive at a maximum depth of
34m.  They planned to ascend using a delayed SMB.  Their
planned dive time was 30 mins with 7 mins  of decompression
stops.  At 28 mins they started their ascent.  They spotted what
they though was the shotline and decided to ascend up this
line.  However this was another length of floating line that
stopped at 14m.  They deployed their delayed SMB but, in
doing so, they sank back down to the wreck.  They re-
ascended and attempted to make a stop at 9m.  After 44 mins
they were at 6m and one of the divers was buoyant.  They were

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC -2000 29
unable to maintain depth and arrived at the surface.  The SMB
line was tangled with the shotline some distance away and they
had to abandon the SMB reel and line as the boat approached,
to prevent a foul with the boat's propeller.  They were recovered
into the boat and discovered that they had missed 13 mins of
decompression stops.  Both divers were placed on oxygen and
medical advice was sought by mobile phone.  The divers were
advised to attend a recompression facility and they both
underwent precautionary recompression.  Neither diver showed
any symptoms.
June 2000 00/162
Two divers were conducting a wreck dive at a depth of 18m
when the weightbelt of one of the pair worked loose.  She
removed the belt to readjust it but had difficulty due to thick
gloves.  The weights slid off the belt.  Her buddy was able to
prevent an immediate buoyant ascent.  The pair attempted to
make their way back to the shotline, but the buoyant diver lost
control and made a rapid ascent to the surface.  She was
recovered into the boat and placed on oxygen.  No symptoms
were experienced and no further action was taken.
June 2000 00/191
Two divers had been to 18m and came back up to 6m.  At this
point, one of the divers panicked, lost control of her buoyancy,
and made a rapid ascent to the surface.  Dive duration 24 mins.
No subsequent ill effects were experienced.
June 2000 00/159
Two divers completed a dive to 27m and started their ascent
after 29 mins.  At 20m one of the pair experienced difficulties
dumping air from his cuff dump.  The other diver indicated that
he should hold the SMB line.  The first diver was still too
buoyant and the second diver dumped air to slow the ascent.
The pair ascended from 17 to 7m in 20 seconds.  At this point
the buoyant diver let go of the line and rose to the surface.  The
second diver started to descend, regained control and
ascended to 6m where he completed a 2 min stop.  Both divers
were recovered into the boat and the buoyant diver was placed
on oxygen although he was showing no symptoms.  The boat
returned to shore and the Coastguard was notified.  The divers
were airlifted to hospital from where they were later released
with no ill effects.
June 2000 00/340
A safety line snagging at 37m led this diver to have an
'explosive' ascent. He was airlifted to hospital.  (Coastguard
report).
July 2000 00/349
Following an abnormal ascent and missed stops, two divers
were given oxygen aboard their boat and airlifted to a
hyperbaric unit for precautionary treatment, although none were
showing DCI symptoms. Dive was to 43.6m for 18 mins.
(Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/355
A diver ran out of air and made a rapid ascent from a 22m/31
min dive. On medical advice, the casualty was taken to hospital
by ambulance.  (Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/250
A diver's BCD was burned during the trip to the dive site by a
torch which had been left on.  This diver borrowed a BCD to
conduct his dive.  He dived to 34m for 20 mins but became
buoyant during the dive, as he consumed air, and made a rapid
ascent to the surface, missing decompression stops.  He was
placed on oxygen for 20 mins.  No ill effects were experienced.
July 2000 00/353
A fast ascent from 15m left a diver anxious. He was given
oxygen and medical advice was arranged by Coastguard. He
was advised not to dive for 24 hours.  (Coastguard report).
July 2000 00/198
During a dive, at a depth of 29m, a diver panicked.  His buddy
brought him to the surface.  They made a rapid ascent.  The
total dive time had been 18 mins.  At the surface the diver who
had panicked coughed up a little blood and had a slight pain in
his right elbow.  One hour later his symptoms had resolved.
July 2000 00/205
Two divers were conducting a wreck dive to a maximum depth
of 40m.  At 32m one of the pair signaled that he could not
locate his contents gauge.  The other diver did not understand
the signal, believed that there was a problem, and signaled that
they should abort the dive and ascend.  They started their
ascent but the diver with the lost gauge was unable to dump air
from his drysuit and made an uncontrolled, rapid ascent, to 6m.
Here he managed to regain control and conducted a 1 min
stop.  The divers were separated and the other diver made a
normal ascent.  Once back in the boat, the diver who had made
the rapid ascent was placed on oxygen.  The Coastguard was
alerted and medical advice was sought.  Continued oxygen
administration and hospitalization was recommended.  On
arrival back on shore the diver and buddy were taken by
ambulance to a helicopter and then flown to hospital.  The diver
remained on oxygen for 4 hours.  No symptoms were
experienced and the diver was discharged from hospital.
July 2000 00/206
A diver was negatively buoyant at 20m and felt 'stuck to the
bottom'.  Her buddy assisted her to the surface and a rapid
ascent occurred.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced.
July 2000 00/207
Whilst practicing controlled buoyant lifts a diver became too
buoyant and made a fast ascent to the surface.  She had been
unable to vent her drysuit.  The diver was shaken up but
otherwise unhurt.
August 2000 00/219
Two divers had completed a wreck dive to a depth of 30m and
were ascending the shotline.  At 9m the shotline was released
from the wreck and the divers were unable to prevent
themselves being carried to the surface.  At 9m their computers
indicated that no stops were necessary, however, on leaving
the water one of the computers indicated that 8 mins at 3m had
been missed. The dive time had been 23 mins.  No subsequent
ill effects were experienced.
August 2000 00/227
A pair of divers completed a dive to 37m.  They deployed a
delayed SMB to make their ascent.  During the ascent, at 20m,
one of the pair lost control of the buoyancy of her drysuit and
rose quickly to the surface.  Her buddy made a fast ascent to
9m and then completed a normal ascent.  The buoyant diver
was recovered into the boat and placed on oxygen.  She
remained on oxygen for 80 mins and experienced no
symptoms.  Medical advice was sought by radio.  It is believed
that a faulty drysuit dump valve was the cause of the incident.

NDC Diving Incidents Report -2000
30 ©BS-AC - 2000
No subsequent ill effects were reported.
August 2000 00/402
A diver surfaced from a 40m dive but missed 6 mins of stops.
He then suffered vomiting. He was airlifted to hospital.
(Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/234
Three divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 36m.
One of the group was suffering from seasickness prior to the
dive.  This diver failed to secure the crotch strap of his BCD.
The divers began their ascent, deploying a delayed SMB at
30m.  At around 25m the diver with the loose strap inflated his
BCD instead of dumping, by mistake.  He lost control of his
buoyancy and because of the loose strap could not regain
control.  He was carried to the surface missing decompression
stops.  The other divers surfaced normally.  The buoyant diver
was placed on oxygen.  He developed no symptoms of DCI but
was seasick.  The Coastguard was alerted and the diver
airlifted to a recompression facility where he received
treatment.  No subsequent ill effects were reported.
September 2000 00/405
A diver made a rapid ascent from a depth of 20m during a 50m
dive. He had suffered an intake of water into his suit. He was
close to drowning, but improved after O2 was administered. No
symptoms of DCI.  (Coastguard report).
September 2000 00/245
Two divers undertook a dive to 25m.  At the end of the dive
they deployed a delayed SMB, but the octopus regulator that
they had used continued to free flow.  The diver with the free
flowing regulator took his buddy's alternative air source.  They
started their ascent but, at 10m, they became tangled in the
SMB line.  They descended to 17m.  One of the pair used his
BCD's emergency cylinder to regain buoyancy.  Despite
dumping air they were then carried quickly to the surface.  Their
computers did not indicate that stops had been missed.  Both
divers were placed on oxygen for 20 mins and monitored.  No
subsequent ill effects were reported.
September 2000 00/249
Two divers conducted a wreck dive to a depth of 28m.  They
started their ascent after 18 mins.  At 23m one of the pair felt
that he was ascending too fast.  He attempted to dump air from
both his BCD and his drysuit and his buddy tried to slow the
ascent.  The buddy could not retain a hold and the buoyant
diver was carried too quickly to the surface.  He managed to
slow the ascent a little but reached the surface within 1 min.
His buddy made a normal ascent and they were recovered into
the boat.  The buoyant diver had no symptoms but was placed
on oxygen.  Once ashore he sought medical advice.  No
symptoms developed and no treatment was given.
September 2000 00/410
An elderly diver, who had missed decompression stops, was
conveyed ashore by his dive vessel and taken to a hyperbaric
unit by ambulance as a precaution.  (Coastguard report).
September 2000 00/419
A 46m dive for 26 mins ended with a fast ascent from 36m. The
diver was transferred to a hyperbaric unit. Note, the diver's
equipment was washed ashore the following day.  (Coastguard
report)

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC -2000 31
Technique
November 1999 00/041
A group of three divers completed a night dive to 22m for a
duration of 24 mins.  Towards the end of the dive, one of the
group had 50 bar remaining at a depth of 20m.  He showed this
to the dive leader and signaled that they should ascend.  During
the ascent this diver became concerned that he would run out of
air before reaching the surface.  He made a fast ascent to the
surface and attracted the attention of other divers who were at
the surface.  The diver was helped from the water.  His buddies
made a normal ascent.  No ill effects were reported.
November 1999 00/031
Two divers were 10 mins into a wreck dive at a depth of 25m.
They encountered a third, unknown, diver who indicated that he
had a problem.  This diver had been diving with two others but
had become separated from them.  He was very buoyant and
was hanging on to the wreck to prevent himself ascending.  This
diver had just run into decompression requirements.  The first
pair tried unsuccessfully to transfer weight to him.  They also
looked around for some loose piece of wreckage to act as
weight, but could not find any.  They decided to make
themselves as heavy as possible, by dumping air, and to hold
on to the third diver to slow his ascent.  This they did and were
able to make a safe ascent including a 1 min stop at 6m.  The
buoyant diver reported that he had a new undersuit and had not
correctly weighted himself.  One of the pair left the water with a
headache which was resolved after a few minutes on oxygen.
The buoyant diver's buddies returned to the surface soon
afterwards.  No subsequent ill effects were reported.
January 2000 00/063
Three divers were at a depth of 18m.  One was struggling to get
his buoyancy correct and then got into difficulties breathing.  He
was given an alternative air source but he spat this out.  He was
panicking and was brought to the surface.  No subsequent ill
effects were experienced.
February 2000 00/061
At a depth of 22m one of a pair of divers lost control of his
buoyancy and rose to the surface.  He waited for his buddy.
After a while he decided to re-descend and met his buddy at 3m.
They re-descended to 20m where they realized that they had
insufficient air to continue.  They surfaced again.  After one hour
they sought advice.  They were advised not to dive again for 24
hours.  No subsequent ill effects were reported.
February 2000 00/089
Three divers entered the water intending to conduct some
training drills which included compass navigation.  They
descended to 6m and settled onto the quarry floor.  One of the
three felt uneasy, but he began his compass exercise and swam
out into water that was 20m deep.  He felt that his weightbelt
was slipping and was not able to adjust his buoyancy.  He
signaled to the others that he wished to ascend.  He then started
to descend quickly.  One of the other two made an ascent but
the other realized that there was a problem and swam down
after the descending diver.  He caught him at 16m but was
unable to put air into the heavy diver's BCD.  He used his own
suit to make a controlled buoyant lift and brought them both to
the surface.  No subsequent ill effects were reported.  The heavy
diver was using borrowed equipment and it is believed that the
direct feed hose was not the correct one for the BCD.  He was
also excessively weighted.
March 2000 00/277
A shore diver lost her buddy and panicked. Both divers assisted
ashore by members of the public prior to a lifeboat arriving.
(Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/084
Three divers were 15 mins into a dive at a depth of 20m.  One of
the group developed a problem with his fin  strap and signaled
that he was going to ascend.  The other two decided to follow
him to the surface.  During the ascent, these two became
separated and one of them started to sink back down.  His
buddy thought that he was still ascending.  The sinking diver
dropped back to the bottom and landed on top of a diver from
another buddy pair.  He was panicking and struggling.  The other
divers calmed the panicking diver and then attempted to lift him
to the surface using his drysuit.  However, air was found to be
leaking from the drysuit feed hose and one of the pair lifted the
third diver using his own buoyancy.  All were safely recovered
from the water.  The panicked diver had sustained an injury to
his ear, but no other ill effects were experienced.
April 2000 00/113
A diver was conducting a cold water orientation dive.  7 mins
into the dive, at a depth of 18m, one of his fins came off and his
weightbelt slipped.  He panicked and made a rapid ascent to the
surface.  His buddy went with him.  No subsequent ill effects
were reported.
May 2000 00/110
An instructor and trainee were diving at a depth of 21m.  The
trainee gave the out of air signal and the instructor gave her his
alternative air source.  The trainee panicked and made a fast
ascent to the surface from 10m without a regulator.  Her cylinder
was subsequently found to contain 100 bar.  No subsequent ill
effects were experienced.
June 2000 00/193
Two divers were descending to a planned depth of 20m.  At 12m
one of the pair panicked and was brought to the surface by her
buddy.  They made a slightly faster than normal ascent.  No
subsequent ill effects were experienced.
July 2000 00/196
Two divers were at a depth of 13m when one of them lost a fin.
He panicked and they made a fast ascent to the surface.  Their
total dive time was 21 mins.   No subsequent ill effects were
experienced.
July 2000 00/200
Three divers undertook a dive in a depth of 20m.  After 10 mins
they became separated in low visibility.  Two of the divers
surfaced but the third did not.  A search was being organized
when the third diver surfaced safely 11 mins later.
August 2000 00/210
Two divers entered the water to dive on a wreck at a depth of
35m.  Underwater they became separated in low visibility.  One
of the pair completed a normal dive including decompression
stops, the other became tangled in some fishing nets that were

NDC Diving Incidents Report -2000
32 ©BS-AC - 2000
laying on the wreck.  This diver took some time to free himself
and he used all of his air, including that in his pony cylinder, in
getting back to the surface.  He did not deploy a delayed SMB
as he wished to conserve the air supply.  His total dive duration
was 64 mins.  This diver's computer indicated missed
decompression stops.  He was placed on oxygen and the boat
returned to shore.  The diver had completed a series of 5 dives
to 30 - 40m over the previous 3 days.  Medical advice was
sought and it was decided that he should receive precautionary
recompression treatment.  The Coastguard was alerted and the
diver was flown by helicopter to a recompression facility where
he was recompressed.  No symptoms of DCI were present at
any time.
August 2000 00/395
Five shore divers were observed waving for help. On arrival of
the lifeboat it was discovered that the reason for the distress
was a lost weightbelt. Her dive buddy escorted her to the shore
while the other three continued their dive.  (Coastguard report).
August 2000 00/401
A shore diver had problems with her buoyancy and inhaled
water. She was pulled from the water and found not to be
breathing. First aid was administered. She was airlifted to
Dorchester Hospital where she made a recovery.  (Coastguard
report).

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC -2000 33
Equipment
October 1999 00/006
Two divers were 17 mins into a dive, at a depth of 36m, when
the octopus regulator of one of the two went into free flow.
They ascended using the alternative air source of the other
diver.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced.
November 1999 00/033
Two divers made a descent in a quarry.  At a depth of 27m one
of the pair indicated a problem with his regulator and switched
to his octopus regulator.    He still experienced problems and
accepted the octopus regulator from the dive leader.  They
started their ascent and at this point the problem regulator
began to free flow.  The dive leader switched this cylinder off
and then back on again at 16m.  The dive leader tested the
previously free flowing regulator and found it to be working
correctly.  The other diver then switched back to his own
regulator and they made a safe ascent to the surface.  The
diver reported that he had felt water in both mouthpieces.
Examination revealed a small hole in the octopus regulator
mouthpiece.  The water temperature was recorded as 6 deg C.
January 2000 00/180
During a dive, at a depth of 12m, a trainee experienced a
regulator free flow.  The trainee had not been trained how to
deal with this and started to ascend rapidly.  The instructor took
control and, using the instructor's alternative air source, they
made a controlled ascent.  No subsequent ill effects were
experienced.
January 2000 00/053
Two divers were 3 mins into a dive at a depth of 24m when
both their regulators began to free flow.  They made a faster
than normal ascent.  No ill effects were reported.
January 2000 00/058
Two divers made a slow descent, down a slope, to a depth of
20m.  At this point one of the pair started to take in water and
signaled that she wanted to ascend.  Her buddy brought her to
the surface.  The ascent was faster than normal.  At the
surface the diver was distressed, having difficulty breathing and
coughing.  She was recovered from the water and placed on
oxygen.  She was taken to hospital and discharged 3 hours
later.  Subsequent examination of the regulator uncovered a
small hole in the mouthpiece.
January 2000 00/055
An instructor and a trainee were at a depth of 20m.  The
trainee's regulator began to free flow.  The instructor brought
the trainee to the surface using his alternative air source.  They
made a fairly fast ascent.  Their total dive time was 10 mins.
The water temperature was 4 deg C.   No subsequent ill effects
were experienced.
February 2000 00/059
Two divers were 15 mins into a dive at a depth of 35m when
the regulator of one of the pair began to free flow.  They made
a faster than normal ascent to the surface.  No subsequent ill
effects were reported.
February 2000 00/056
3 mins into a shore dive to a depth of 30m a diver's regulator
began to free flow.  His buddy tried to stop the free flow but
failed.  The diver spat out the free flowing regulator.  The buddy
took hold of the other diver's BCD at which point he started to
panic.  The buddy offered his own regulator but this was spat
out and the troubled diver struggled to get to the surface.  The
buddy stopped him and offered his alternative air source but it
was refused.  The pair struggled and fell to the bottom with the
buddy on top of the distressed diver.  Again the alternative air
source was offered but rejected.  The buddy then released the
other's weightbelt.  A diver from another pair in the same group
came to their assistance and lifted the distressed diver to the
surface.  The buddy was joined by the buddy from the second
pair and, after a few minutes, they made a normal ascent.   At
the surface the alarm was raised and the distressed diver, who
was now unconscious, was recovered from the water.  Oxygen
was administered and an ambulance was called.  The diver
was able to talk by the time he was taken to hospital.
March 2000 00/080
An instructor and three trainees were diving to a depth of 31m.
4 mins into the dive, one of the trainees' regulators began to
free flow.  This diver swam to the instructor to take his octopus
regulator.  At this point all of the divers' regulators began to free
flow.  The divers made a rapid ascent to the surface.  No
subsequent ill effects were reported.
March 2000 00/082
At the beginning of a dive, at a depth of 36m a diver's regulator
went into free flow.  The dive was aborted and a fast ascent
was made.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced.
March 2000 00/083
Two divers made a surface swim for 50m then dived to a depth
of 20m.  At the bottom, the regulator of one of the divers began
to free flow.  They made a slightly rapid ascent to the surface.
No subsequent ill effects were reported.
April 2000 00/098
Three divers conducted a wreck dive to a depth of 36m.  9 mins
into the dive, the regulator of one of the group started to free
flow.  This diver shared air with one of his buddies.  He was not
able to stop the free flow and the air supply from this cylinder
was rapidly lost.  Rather than attempting to find the shotline,
the divers deployed a delayed SMB, using the free flowing
regulator, and made a normal ascent.  They swapped the air
sharing donor in order to maintain an even spread of the
remaining air supply.  Later it was found that the regulator had
a small knob on the front of the second stage that was set
away from the 'Dive' position.  The divers were unclear as to
the function or purpose of this knob.
May 2000 00/131
A diver experienced air supply problems whilst underwater and
became unconscious.  He sank to a depth of 18m from where
his buddy was able to bring him back to the surface.  He was
given expired air resuscitation once back in the boat.  He was
flown by helicopter to hospital, where he made a recovery.
(Newspaper report only)
May 2000 00/125

NDC Diving Incidents Report -2000
34 ©BS-AC - 2000
A diver experienced problems with his weightbelt and air supply
during a dive.  He was unconscious at the surface.  The
Coastguard was alerted and he was airlifted to hospital.
Resuscitation techniques were used in the helicopter.  A full
recovery was anticipated.  (Newspaper report only)
July 2000 00/199
Three divers conducted a dive to 18m using rebreathers.  One
of the group commenced the dive with a headache and was
apprehensive.  Several minutes into the dive he decided to
abort the dive and signaled to his buddies that he was going to
ascend.  He made his way back to the shotline and started his
ascent.  He attempted to change from semi-closed operation to
open circuit on the ascent.  At the surface this diver swam to
the boat and then lost the ability to respond or communicate.
People in the boat recovered the semiconscious diver and
placed him on oxygen.  He quickly recovered.  It was
subsequently discovered that the C02 absorbent had been
used previously and was exhausted.
July 2000 00/215
Two divers were conducting a dive on a boulder slope at a
depth of 17m.  One of the pair was too heavy and the dive
leader indicated to him to put air into his BCD.  This he did and
air was seen coming out of the overpressure valve.  The divers
were then at 21m and the diver who was heavy lost a fin, he
panicked and his mask half flooded.  The dive leader took hold
of him and tried to lift him with a controlled buoyant lift but there
was a problem with the BCD.  The dive leader therefore lifted
the heavy diver using his own BCD, during the ascent he lost
the other fin.  At the surface the dive leader towed the troubled
diver to the shore.  He was shaken but unharmed.  His BCD
was found to be full of water.

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC - 2000 35
Miscellaneous
March 2000 00/276
A known drug addict decided to go shore diving, for the first time
ever, alone. A member of the public found him lying on the
beach suffering from hypothermia. Diving was attempted due to
his drug induced state. He was taken into Police custody.
(Coastguard & RNLI report)
April 2000 00/283
A dive boat with 4 POB was reported overdue. Enquiries
revealed that they were OK but had missed their ferry back.
(Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/293
A major search was initiated following a report of a missing dive
boat. It was found safe at harbour.  (Coastguard & RNLI report)
April 2000 00/298
A 999 call was received reporting a dive RHIB overdue. A
communications search was started but the RHIB returned safe
and well.  (Coastguard report).
April 2000 00/428
Lifeboat launched to assist divers, others coped.  (RNLI report)
May 2000 00/312
A shore diver, following his compass, became disorientated and
surfaced a long way seaward. He shouted and blew his whistle
to attract attention. A local vessel brought the casualty ashore.
(Coastguard report).
May 2000 00/435
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat.  False alarm.  (RNLI
report)
June 2000 00/445
Two lifeboats launched to assist dive boat.  False alarm.  (RNLI
report)
July 2000 00/203
Twp pairs of divers were preparing to dive from a floating
pontoon.  One diver was standing on one leg fitting her fin,
supporting her self by holding on to an upright on the pontoon.
Another diver entered the water and the motion of the pontoon
caused the diver fitting her fin to fall into the water.  She hit her
arm as she fell and smashed her dive watch.
July 2000 00/369
Two divers reported banging noises coming from the hull of a
wreck. Possible trapped persons were reported. SAR units were
dispatched to the scene, but all divers in the charter party were
accounted for. A false alarm with good intent, classed as 'other'.
(Coastguard & RNLI report)
August 2000 00/388
Coastguards commenced to search for a diving party that had
been reported overdue. It later transpired that the divers had
forgotten to report back and had gone home. Classed as 'other'.
(Coastguard report).

NDC Diving Incidents Report -2000
36 ©BS-AC - 2000
Overseas Incidents
Fatalities
June 2000 00/151
An instructor was taking two trainees on a 'try dive'.  They
entered the water from a beach and swam a short distance
underwater.  One of the trainees was finning a bit too strongly
and the instructor held him back.  The second trainee had a
buoyancy problem and whilst the instructor was resolving this
the first trainee swam ahead about 5m.  The instructor then
noticed the first trainee sitting on the bottom, unconscious, with
his regulator out of his mouth.  The instructor brought both of
the trainees to the surface.  He gave the first trainee AV and
towed him 3 to 4m to the beach.  The casualty was given AV
and CPR and two doctors, who had been nearby, came to help.
The emergency services were summoned but the casualty
failed to recover.  It is believed that the casualty suffered a
heart attack.
Decompression
November 1999 00/038
A diver completed a dive to 20m for 48 mins with the last 14
mins spent at 8m.  2 hours later she dived again to 19m for 40
mins with the last 12 mins spent between 6 and 8m.  During
these dives she had to swim against a water current.  The
following day, 18 hours later, she experienced a numbness in
her left arm and leg.  She sought medical advice, was placed
on oxygen and then received a series of hyperbaric treatments.
She was advised to delay her return flight home.  On her return
she required further medical attention.
January 2000 00/065
Two divers were 7 mins into a dive to a maximum depth of 28m
when they resurfaced.  One of the pair was in distress,
coughing and choking.  She had been brought to the surface by
her buddy using a controlled buoyant lift.  Her buddy and
another diver towed her 15m to their boat and she was
recovered into the boat.  She was placed on oxygen.  The
casualty was taken ashore and given hot fluids.  Still on oxygen
she was taken, in the recovery position, to a medical facility.
She was cold, clammy and uncommunicative.  90 mins after
surfacing the casualty complained of pains in her knees,
elbows and shoulders, and a headache.  5 mins later she lost
consciousness.  After a further 5 mins she regained
consciousness and complained of sharp pains in all joints.  3
hours after surfacing the diver was recompressed for 4 hours
45 mins.  Concerns with a fin and a mask were implicated in
the initial problem.
March 2000 00/093
A diver conducted a series of four dives over a period of 24
hours, the last of which was a night dive.  That night she
noticed a pink rash on her stomach and some soreness.  She
did not sleep well that night and felt tired and sore in the
morning.  She then conducted three dives.  She felt better after
the first dive.  1 hour after surfacing from the last dive she felt
'bruised and battered' and noticed that the pink rash had
become darker.  She started to feel very unwell and was placed
on oxygen.  She was taken to a recompression facility and
received five recompression treatments.  Her symptoms were
resolved.
March 2000 00/123
Two divers were conducting a dive at a depth of 20m.  20 mins
into the dive the pair were approached by two large sea lions.
The sea lions swam around them for a while, then one of them
grabbed the left fin of one of the divers dragging him backwards
and upwards.  The diver made an uncontrolled, inverted ascent
to the surface.  At the surface he gave the distress signal and
was recovered into the boat.  His buddy made a normal ascent.
Some time later the diver who had made the uncontrolled
ascent experienced a tingling sensation behind his left knee
which continued for more than 1 hour.  He was kept under
medical observation, released the following morning and
advised not to dive for at least 4 weeks.
April 2000 00/182
Two divers completed a 17 hour flight followed by a further 1
hour 30 mins flight in an unpressurized aircraft.  2 hours later
they undertook a dive during which one of the pair went to 32m.
During the ascent she became too light at 10m and rose to the
surface.  She obtained extra weight and dived again to
complete 5 mins of decompression.  She then ran out of air
and surfaced.  The total dive duration had been 30 mins.  On
surfacing this diver was extremely breathless, had a cough, a
tight chest and was shocked.  3 hours later she had recovered.
During the night she experienced severe pain under the finger
nails of her right hand.  The index finger and the little finger
then became blue and cyanotic for about 24 hours.
May 2000 00/095
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 42m for a
total duration of 45 mins.  At 5m one of their computers
indicated a 3 mins stop and the other an 8 mins stop.  They
conducted a 10 mins stop and then made a normal ascent.
Some hours later one of the pair showed signs of DCI and
received recompression treatment.  The other diver showed no
symptoms.
May 2000 00/175
A diver conducted a shore dive to a maximum depth of 19m.
During the ascent 5 mins was spent at 9m.  At 6m he began to
feel anxious and short of breath.  He had to swim hard, against
a current, in 3m depth to get back to the shore.  Once ashore
he was very confused and unstable.  His right arm was 'flaccid'.
He was given oxygen and taken back to his hotel.  His
condition improved.  The hotel doctor diagnosed a 'transient
ischemic attack' due to de-hydration.  6 hours later this diver
experienced partial paralysis of his left leg and suffered from
urine retention.  He was placed on oxygen and taken to a
recompression facility for treatment.  He received 6 sessions of
recompression treatment.  He then flew back to the UK and
received further recompression treatment.  A CT scan revealed
small cysts on his lungs that were not visible on a conventional
x-ray.  A gradual, continuing recovery was reported.
May 2000 00/186
Two divers completed a dive to a maximum depth of 28m.
During the ascent, at 15m, the drysuit dump valve of one of the
pair stuck and he made rapid ascent to the surface, missing 2

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC - 2000 37
mins of decompression stops.  His buddy made a normal
ascent including stops.  The diver who had made the rapid
ascent had no symptoms but was placed on oxygen.  The party
returned to shore.  Later the diver developed symptoms of DCI
and he was given recompression treatment.  A full recovery
was reported.  This diver had been using a new drysuit.
May 2000 00/143
A diver undertook a dive to 18m for 25 mins, 7 hours 15 mins
after an aircraft flight.  Later that day he dived again to 16m.
Some time after this dive he complained of a pain in his arm,
he was recompressed and the pain was eased.  The following
day the diver reported further pain and was recompressed
again.  DCI was not confirmed.  The diver was reported to have
been 'hung over', 'not dive fit' and highly apprehensive prior to
the dives.
July 2000 00/208
On vacation a diver completed a series of 6 dives over a 4 day
period.  These dives were between 10 and 30m, all were no
stop dives and all included a 5 min safety stop.  This diver was
using a dive computer.  He had a one day break and completed
two further dives.  The next day he dived again to 24m for a
total of 46 mins which included a 5 min safety stop.  Leaving
the water he climbed a ladder back onto the boat and noticed a
pain in his left bicep.  During the second dive that day the pain
reduced, he was concerned that this might be a symptom of
DCI and terminated the dive.  After the dive the pain did not
return.  Later that evening the pain returned and moved into his
left elbow.  The diver sought medical advice and received
recompression treatment.  During the treatment some pain
relief was experienced but it returned when he was brought
back to atmospheric pressure.  He received four further
treatments over the following 3 days.  72 hours after the last
treatment he flew home without incident.  Some pain remained
and he was seeking further medical treatment.
August 2000 00/224
A diver conducted a dive to 21m for 36 mins including a 3 min
stop at 6m.  3 hours 36 mins later she dived again to 20m.
During this dive she experienced severe cramp in her right leg
and lay on the seabed.  Her buddy decided to abort the dive,
and, as she was unable to use her leg, used a controlled
buoyant lift to get her to the surface.  The final 3m was quite
fast and their computers registered an ascent rate alarm.  Back
in the boat the cramp was still present and the diver reported
'pins and needles' in the fingertips of her left hand and a
headache.  The diver was placed on oxygen and assistance
was requested by radio.  'Pins and needles' were also
experienced in the right hand.  The diver was taken to a
recompression facility.  1 hour after surfacing the symptoms
were improving and she was not recompressed.  A further hour
later the symptoms had resolved.  She remained in hospital
under observation for a day before being released.  The buddy
showed no symptoms.
Injury/Illness
December 1999 00/047
A diver's equipment was being lifted out of the water into a
RHIB.  The RHIB rolled in a swell causing the crew member
who was lifting the equipment to slip.  The equipment fell back
into the water, hitting the diver on the head.  The diver was
recovered into the boat, where she complained of blurred vision
and a severe headache.  Assistance was summoned by radio
and the boat returned to shore.  The casualty was airlifted to
hospital.  She was released the following day having made a
full recovery.
March 2000 00/119
A diver completed a dive to 13m for a duration of 33 mins,
including a 2 min stop at 6m.  3 hours 30 mins later he dived
again to 13m for 27 mins.  At the surface he had to swim 60m
to the boat.  During this swim the diver developed a severe
headache.  Once in the boat he was placed on oxygen and the
symptoms eased after 5 mins.  He was given fluids and taken
back to the shore.  The diver was given a medical examination.
Dehydration was suspected and he was given a painkiller,
fluids and further oxygen.  The symptoms eased and the
casualty was kept under observation for 24 hours.  This took
place in hot climate conditions.
April 2000 00/142
After a dive a diver was recovered into an RHIB.  She then fell
and struck her face on a radio bracket.  The radio was not in
place as it was being repaired.  The diver's face was cut and
she was taken ashore in another boat where she received
medical treatment.
April 2000 00/121
A diver was ascending a ladder to the upper deck of a dive
boat.  Whilst climbing this ladder he struck his head on a
wooden sign.
April 2000 00/122
A diver was ascending a ladder to the upper deck of a dive
boat.  Whilst climbing this ladder he struck his head on a
wooden sign, this caused a cut to his forehead.  (Same boat
but different individual to 00/121)
April 2000 00/120
A diver loaded a kit bag, picked it up and began to walk away.
After two paces he struck his head on the raised tailgate of a
parked vehicle.  He sustained a cut above his right eye.
May 2000 00/106
An instructor and a trainee entered the water from a beach.
They dived and moved into deeper water.  Both divers had
trouble clearing their ears.  Visibility was poor and at 8m they
encountered a current which was carrying them along the
shore.  They swam back up the slope into chest deep water.
They waded back to their entry point and dived again.  Again
they had problems with their ears and at 6m the instructor
became disorientated and dizzy.  They ascended directly to the
surface.  At the surface the instructor was in distress and the
trainee shouted for assistance and started to tow him ashore.
Other divers entered the water to assist them ashore.  Once
ashore the distressed diver was given oxygen and taken to
hospital.  A medical examination failed to reveal any problems.
August 2000 00/225
A diver conducted a dive to 32m for 31 mins with a 3 min stop
at 6m.  5 hours 47 mins later he dived again to 23m for 34 mins
with an 8 mins stop at 6m.  The decompression stop for the
first dive was completed with the diver hanging on to the boat's
anchor line with his left hand.  The conditions were rough and
the anchor line was jerked up and down.  1 hours 52 mins after
the last dive he reported a headache and, 30 mins later, a

NDC Diving Incidents Report -2000
38 ©BS-AC - 2000
tingling in the back of his left hand.  He was given oxygen.  20
mins later the symptoms had resolved and oxygen was
discontinued.  30 mins later he experienced tingling in the left
hand side of his face and oxygen was restarted.  33 mins later
the symptoms were improved and oxygen was discontinued.
The diver reported a numbness in his lower left arm and an
elbow joint ache.  This was believed to be a muscular problem.
5 days later the diver was concerned that he had a DCI and
detailed medical tests were conducted and inflamed joints were
diagnosed.  Treatment was prescribed and the diver recovered.
August 2000 00/239
A diver descended to a depth of 7m.  Her contents gauge was
seen to be fluctuating and the dive leader took her to the
surface.  Whilst ascending she felt pain in her ears 'even after
equalizing'.  At the surface she still had pain and the dive was
aborted.  Medical examination revealed bleeding in one ear and
a perforation in the other.  She was given
Boating / Surface Incidents
June 2000 00/129
The engine compartment of a dive boat became swamped and
the engine could not be started.  The boat was being blown
towards a rocky shore and the anchor was deployed.
Assistance was sought by radio.  The anchor was dragging and
no response was received to the radio call.  The radio call was
escalated through 'Pan Pan' to 'Mayday'.  A local boat picked
up the 'Mayday' call and came to assist.  The disabled boat
was taken in tow and returned to harbour.
Ascents
May 2000 00/174
Three divers were conducting a dive on an underwater rock
face at a maximum depth of 33m.  They ascended the cliff but
at a depth of 15m one of the three was unable to control his
buoyancy.  He was able to release air from his BCD but was
not able to make his drysuit dump valve operate.  He was
carried to the surface, missing a 1 min stop at 6m.  Subsequent
examination revealed a design fault that allowed the valve to
become jammed shut.  No subsequent ill effects were reported
August 2000 00/223
A diver was conducting a dive to a maximum depth of 28m.
Half way through the dive, at a depth of 15m, she was unable
to dump air from her drysuit cuff dump and rose quickly to 10m.
She managed to swim back down to 15m and stabilize her
buoyancy.  Her buddy deployed a delayed SMB.  The buoyant
diver started to rise again and held onto her buddy's manifold.
At 5m she let go of her buddy and rose directly to the surface.
Her computer indicated 17 mins of missed decompression
stops.  Back in the boat she was placed on oxygen.  Although
she showed no symptoms of DCI she received a 1 hour
recompression treatment.  It was subsequently discovered that
her inner suit had blocked the dump valve.
Technique
October 1999 00/021
Two divers descended to a depth of 40m, they exchanged OK
signals during the descent.  At 40m one of the pair signaled
that she was 'not OK' and that she wanted to ascend.  She
became agitated and started to panic.  She was breathing very
hard.  Her buddy took hold of her BCD in order to calm her
down, but she responded with frantic signals and began to fin
towards the surface.  Her buddy attempted to control the
ascent rate.   At the surface the buddy gave the distress signal
and they awaited recovery by their boat.  The distressed diver
lay back in the water and was able to regain control.  Total dive
duration 6 mins.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced.
January 2000 00/064
A pair of divers conducted a dive to 15m.  After 11 mins they
surfaced and gave the distress signal to their boat.  They were
recovered into the boat and placed on oxygen - 5 mins on and
5 mins off, twice.  The divers were taken ashore and were
given a medical examination.  No symptoms were found and
the divers were advised not to dive for five days.
April 2000 00/185
An instructor was conducting mask clearing drills with two
trainees in a depth of 7m.  One of the trainees breathed out too
hard and water was forced up her nose.  This caused her to
panic.  The instructor took hold of the trainee who was
struggling to surface.  The trainee was unable to break free and
inflated her BCD.  In her struggles she knocked the regulator
from the instructor's mouth.  The instructor was unable to find
his regulator and concentrated on controlling the ascent.  Once
at the surface he ensured that the distressed trainee was
alright and then dived again to bring the second trainee to the
surface.  No subsequent ill effects were reported.
June 2000 00/192
Two divers began a dive.  At 7m one of the pair experienced
problems with his regulator and returned to the surface to fix it.
He dived again and they descended to a maximum depth of
37m.  18 mins into the dive they started their ascent.  The
contents gauge of one of the pair showed 70 bar.  They made a
slow ascent, dropping back 4m at one point.  At 16m they
deployed a delayed SMB which had to be untangled.  They
stopped at 12m for 1 min and the diver who had had 70 bar at
the start of the ascent developed cramp.  At 9m he had
between 0 and 10 bar remaining in his air cylinder.  He took
what he thought was his buddy's octopus regulator and started
to breathe from this.  It was, however, his pony cylinder and it
was quickly emptied.  He fumbled for the buddy's octopus
regulator.  He then took the main regulator from his buddy's
mouth and the buddy switched to his octopus regulator.  They
slowly drifted to the surface.  The buddy re-descended to finish
his decompression stops.  The diver at the surface orally
inflated his BCD but struggled with cramp and from being
tipped forwards onto his face.  His buddy finally surfaced and
towed him to the boat.  Back on the boat he breathed oxygen
as a precaution.  It was subsequently discovered that the
contents gauge of the diver who had run out of air stuck at 70
bar.
Equipment

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC - 2000 39
October 1999 00/029
3 mins into a dive, at a depth of 12 m, the mouth piece came
off of a diver's regulator.  She attempted to breath from the
regulator without the mouthpiece but was not able to.  She
grabbed her buddy's octopus regulator and they made a safe
ascent to the surface.  The fastening tie of the mouthpiece was
later found to have been missing.
October 1999 00/030
A group of divers descended to a wreck at 30m.  3 mins into
the dive the pillar valve 'O' ring of one of the group blew out.
She reached for the octopus regulator of another diver but the
mouthpiece became disconnected due to no securing tie being
present.  This diver then swam to another member of the party
and used their octopus regulator.  They all made a safe ascent
to the surface.
November 1999 00/032
An instructor and two trainees dived to 27m in a quarry.  At this
point the regulator of one of the trainees began to free flow.
The instructor passed the trainee his octopus regulator and
they all made a controlled ascent.  At 10m the free flowing
regulator was turned off and then on again and it ceased to free
flow.  They reached the surface safely and no subsequent ill
effects were reported.  The water temperature was recorded as
6 deg C.
April 2000 00/136
A diver dived to 25m for 49 mins.  3 hours 45 mins later she
dived again to 25m for 38 mins.  After a further 3 hours 24 mins
she began a third dive.  A few minutes into this dive, at a depth
of 22m, her regulator failed to supply air and she made an
ascent to the surface sharing air with her buddy.
May 2000 00/161
Two divers were conducting a dive at a depth of 22m when the
regulator of one of the pair became detached from its
mouthpiece.  The diver attracted his buddy's attention and was
given an alternative air source.  The buddy reattached the
mouthpiece and they continued the dive.  The diver was using
a borrowed regulator since he had experienced problems with
his own just prior to the dive.  The tie securing the mouthpiece
was missing but it was not certain if this had happened during
the dive.

NDC Diving Incidents Report -2000
40 ©BS-AC - 2000
INCIDENT REPORTS
If you would like to add to, correct or place a different interpretation upon any of the incidents in this report please put your
comments in writing and send them to the following address:
The Incidents Advisor,
The British Sub-Aqua Club,
Telford's Quay,
Ellesmere Port,
South Wirral,
Cheshire,
CH65 4FL.
For new incidents please complete a BSAC incident report form and send it to BSAC HQ at the address shown above.
All  personal details are treated as confidential.
Incident Report Forms can be obtained free of charge by phoning BSAC HQ on 0151  350 6200
or from the BSAC Internet website.
Numerical & Statistical Analyses
Statistical Summary of Incidents
1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
Incidents Reported 199 123 263 385 351 315 397 452 397 439
Incidents Analysed 199 123 263 385 351 315 370 431 382 417
UK Incidents 170 98 236 322 318 295 349 404 357 384
Overseas Incidents 24 14 21 9 33 20 21 27 25 33
Unknown Locations 5 11 6 54 0 0 0 0 0 1
BSAC Members 111 110 146 164 157 136 101 135 128 113
Non-BSAC Members 18 13 19 8 20 4 29 52 47 52
Membership Unknown 70 0 98 213 178 175 219 217 182 219
Incident  Report Source Analysis
Total Reports: 510
Total Incidents: 417
Other
Newspaper
RNLI
Coastguard
Incident Reports

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2000  
ã BSAC - 2000 41
History of UK Diving Fatalities
Number of Fatalities
Year Membership BSAC Non-BSAC
1965 6,813 3 -
1966 7,979 1 4
1967 8,350 1 6
1968 9,241 2 1
1969 11,299 2 8
1970 13,721 4 4
1971 14,898 0 4
1972 17,041 10 31
1973 19,332 9 20
1974 22,150 3 11
1975 23,204 2 -
1976 25,310 4 -
1977 25,342 3 -
1978 27,510 8 4
1979 30,579 5 8
1980 24,900 6 7
1981 27,834 5 7
1982 29,590 6 3
1983 32,177 7 2
1984 32,950 8 5
1985 34,861 8 6
1986 34,210 6 9
1987 34,500 6 2
1988 32,960 10 6
1989 34,422 4 8
1990 36,434 3 6
1991 43,475 8 9
1992 45,626 9 8
1993 50,722 3 6
1994 50,505 6 6
1995 52,364 9 9
1996 48,920 7 9
1997 48,412 4 12
1998 46,712 6 16
1999 46,682 8 9
2000 41,692 6 11

NDC Diving Incidents Report -2000
42 ©BS-AC - 2000
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE INCIDENT REPORT
AV Artificial ventilation
BCD Buoyancy compensation device (e.g. stab jacket)
CAGE Cerebral arterial gas embolism
CG Coastguard
CPR Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
DCI Decompression illness
DDRC Diving Diseases Research Centre (Plymouth, UK)
ECG Electrocardiogram
Helo Helicopter
ILB Inshore lifeboat
IV Intravenous
m Metre
min(s) Minute(s)
MRSC Marine Rescue Sub Centre
PFO Patent foramen ovale
POB Persons on board
RAF Royal Air Force
RHIB Rigid hull inflatable boat
RNLI Royal National Lifeboat Institution
SAR Search and rescue
SMB Surface marker buoy
999 UK Emergency phone number

