Published by The British Sub-Aqua Club in the interests of diving safety  
 
The British Sub-Aqua Club 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Diving Committee 
Diving Incidents Report  
2013 
 
 
Compiled by 
 
Brian Cumming 
 
Diving Safety and Incidents Advisor 
 

   NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
 
Introduction 
 
This booklet contains the 2013 Diving Incidents Report, produced by British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) in the interest 
of promoting diving safety.  It is important to note that it contains details of UK sports diving incidents occurring 
to divers of all affiliations, plus incidents occurring worldwide involving BSAC members.  
The 2013 ‘Incident Year’ ran from 1st October 2012 to 30th September 2013. 
 
Report Format 
The majority of statistical information contained within this report is also shown in graphical form.  Please note that all 
statistical information is produced from UK data only and does not include Overseas Incidents unless noted as ‘All 
Incidents’. 
The contents of this report are split into an overview of the year, and then the details of nine incident categories plus some 
historical analyses.  The various sections can be found as shown below:- 
 
 i) Overview Page  1 
 ii) Fatalities Page 7 
 iii) Decompression Incidents Page 10 
 iv) Injury / illness Page  20 
 v) Boating & Surface Incidents Page  23 
 vi) Ascent Incidents Page  28 
 vii) Technique Incidents Page  33 
 viii) Equipment Incidents Page  35 
 ix) Miscellaneous Incidents Page  37 
 x) Overseas Incidents Page  38 
 xi) Numerical & Statistical Analyses Page  44 
 xii) List of Abbreviations Page  46 
 
Within each category the incidents are listed in the order of their occurrence, not necessarily that of Incident Reference.  
They are laid out in the following form: 
 
  MONTH/YEAR OF INCIDENT  INCIDENT REF.    
  Brief Narrative of Incident.................................................................................... 
  ........................................................................................................ 
 
The nature of many diving incidents is such that there is usually more than one cause or effect.  Where this is the case the 
incident has been classified under the more appropriate cause or effect. For instance an incident involving a fast ascent, 
causing decompression illness, will be classified under 'Decompression Incidents'. 
 
Brian Cumming, 
BSAC Diving Incidents Advisor, 
November 2013 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
Data for this report are collected from many different sources.  I would like to extend my thanks and appreciation to the 
following for their assistance in its production and in ensuring its completeness: 
  Ken Bazeley, National Diving Liaison Officer, Maritime & Coastguard Agency  
Roger Aldham, Information and Data Manager,  
Katrina Mallaburn, Data and Statistical Analyst, 
Royal National Lifeboat Institution 
MOD Superintendant of Diving 
Mark Caney, PADI Europe, Middle East and Africa 
Sub-Aqua Association 
Scottish Sub-Aqua Club 
Jim Watson for invaluable HQ support 
Lizzie Bird for data input 
Dr. Yvonne Couch for proof reading this report 
and, in particular, all of those divers and other sources who have taken the trouble to complete 
Incident Reports and share their learning experience with others.  

 NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
©BSAC - 2013    1 
Overview 
 
has seen 263 UK diving incidents reported.  This 
continues the decline first observed last year. In 
the years 2006 to 2011 the number of incidents 
reported had been fairly consistent at around 370.  Last year 
saw that number fall to 314 and this year the trend continues.   
There are a number of possible reasons for this:-  
? A normal amount of diving has taken place but:- 
o It has been safer and fewer incidents have occurred. 
o A normal number of incidents have occurred but 
fewer have been reported. 
? Less diving has taken place and thus fewer incidents 
have occurred, leading to fewer reports. 
 
It would be nice if the first reason was found to be the cause of 
the reduction (safer diving) but it seems almost certain that the 
true reason is that there has simply been less diving in the UK 
in this period as there was in 2012.  
 
 
 
Number of reported incidents 
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
199
1
199
3
199
5
199
7
199
9
200
1
200
3
200
5
200
7
200
9
201
1
201
3
  
 
 
 
The distribution of reported incidents by month is shown in the 
following chart.   
 
 
Incidents by month 
Oc
t.  
'12 No
v. De
c.
Jan
. '1
3
Fe
b.
Ma
r. Ap
r. Ma
y
Ju
ne Jul
y
Au
g. Sep
t. 0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
  
 
Normally the distribution of incidents by month follows a 
sinusoidal form with the lowest number of dives in December 
and January, rising to a peak in June and July.  This year the 
number of incidents is down overall and significantly depressed 
in the spring period.  To illustrate this more clearly the following 
chart shows the average number of incidents reported per 
month in the years from 1998 to 2011 to provide a view of the 
'normal' picture and also the 2013 numbers.  2012 has been 
excluded from this analysis as that too was an abnormal year.   
 
 
Incidents by month 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Oct
-12 No
v Dec
Jan
-13 Fe
b
Ma
r
Ap
r
Ma
y
Ju
n Jul Au
g
Se
p
1998 to
2011
2013
  
 
 
As can be seen, the number of incidents in March, April, May 
and June are quite a lot lower than is normal for this period.  
Easter was in April and that would normally be a time when 
many divers take to the water, a lot of them for their first dives 
of the year, and a surge of incidents in this period is normal.  
However, the weather in these months in 2013 was some of the 
worst on record (as it was in 2012).  Easter was recorded as the 
coldest for 50 years with wide spread snow and ice and May 
was very similar, reported as being the coldest for 100 years.  
Clearly this would have deterred many from going diving and 
this is the most plausible explanation for the drop in numbers of 
reported incidents.  The only other possibility is that for some 
unknown reason diving became safer in just these four months 
and that seems very unlikely. 
July saw much better weather, it was generally warm and sunny 
and, as can be seen, the number of incidents reported in July 
was at a normal level.    
Incidentally, August and September's totals are always 
somewhat depressed, each year, as a result of the time that it 
takes for reports to reach us.  The cut-off period was very tight 
this year because of the timing of the Diving Officer's 
Conference and this partially explains the drop in August and 
September.  Reports received post cut-off are included in the 
database for future research purposes but they are not included 
in the annual report. 
 
 
Incidents by category 
The incident database assigns all incidents into one of nine 
major categories, and the following chart shows the distribution 
of the 2013 incidents into those categories.  
 
 
2013 
Incident year 
Incident year 

   NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
2        ©BSAC - 2013 
Categorisation of the year’s incidents 
0 20 40 60 80 100
Overseas
Technique
Equipment
Miscellaneous
Fatalities
Injury / Illness
Ascents
Boat / surface
DCI
 
This distribution is very much in line with the picture seen in 
previous years, although, of course, the overall numbers are 
lower than normal for recent years (excluding 2012). 
 
Cases of 'DCI' have been following a slight downward trend 
over the last ten years and this year's total of 91 does not 
change that trend.  
 
Incidents involving 'Boating and Surface' events had been 
falling progressively since the late 90s.  In the period 2009 to 
2011 this number had jumped back up to levels seen 10 years 
earlier.  This year 55 incidents were recorded and this is much 
more in line with the earlier downward trend.   
This category mainly comprises of problems with boat engines 
(engine failure and out of fuel) and lost diver(s).  
  
‘Ascents’ is the third category and this involves incidents  where 
divers have made an abnormal ascent but avoided DCI or other 
injury.  This category peaked in 2006 and has been steadily 
falling since that time.  This trend is continued in 2013.   43 
'Ascent' related incidents were reported and one has to go back 
to 1999 to find a lower number.  A lot of effort has been put into 
improving diver buoyancy control and these numbers reflect the 
beneficial changes that have been made.   
 
The fourth category is 'Illness and Injury' with 28 incidents 
reported.  The bulk of this is thought to be cases of DCI.  But 
these cases are reported through the RNLI and their reports do 
not specifically record DCI, they often just state ‘Diver illness’.  
For this reason it is not possible to distinguish cases of DCI 
from other diver ailments.  28 cases is significantly below the 
average of recent years.  The RNLI have changed their 
reporting of some diving related incidents and this many 
account for this fall, at least partially. 
 
The last category to be mentioned specifically is ‘Fatalities’ and 
although the numbers are quite small it is, of course, the most 
serious.  This year saw 14 diver fatalities; this is marginally 
below the average of the preceding ten years which was 15. 
 
More analysis on these key incident categories is given later in 
the report.  
 
At this point it is important to remember the conclusion that less 
diving has taken place this year.  Less diving will mean fewer 
incidents, so lower numbers in all categories are to be 
expected.  So a lower number does not automatically imply 
improved safety.   
 
 
 
 
    
Incident depths 
The following chart shows the maximum depth of the dives 
during which incidents took place, categorised into depth range 
groupings. 
 
 
Maximum depth of dive involving an incident 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
>60m
51-60m
41-50m
31-40m
21-30m
11-20m
1-10m
Surf.
Unknown
   
The pattern of depths in the 0m to 50m range is very similar to 
that normally seen and reflects the amount of diving that takes 
place in these depth ranges.   
The number of incidents reported in the greater than 50m 
ranges is 5, this is lower than has been seen in recent years.  
Incidents in this range are usually more serious and contain a 
disproportionate number of fatalities.  This year there was one 
fatality in the greater than 50m depth range, and that involved a 
dive to a maximum depth of 54m. 
  
BSAC advises that no air dive should be deeper than 50m, and 
that dives to 50m should only be conducted by divers who are 
appropriately trained and qualified.   
The recommended limit for divers trained to Sports Diver 
standard is 35m and then only when they have received 
appropriate training for diving at this depth. 
BSAC recommends that helium mixtures are used for depths 
deeper than 40m and that mixed gas diving should be to a 
maximum depth of 100m.  Mixed gas dives should only be 
conducted when the diver holds a recognized qualification to 
conduct such dives.  
See the BSAC website for more details of these and other 
diving depth limit recommendations.  
 
The next chart shows the depths at which incidents started. 
 
Depth at which an incident started 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
>60m
51-60m
41-50m
31-40m
21-30m
11-20m
1-10m
Surf.
Unknown
  
 
 
Number of incidents 
Number of incidents 
Number of incidents 

 NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
©BSAC - 2013    3 
Inevitably the data are biased towards the shallower depths 
since many incidents happen during the ascent or at the 
surface.  Critical among these are the DCI cases where almost 
always the casualty is out of the water before any problems are 
noted.  This partially explains the large occurrence of ‘Surface’ 
cases as this includes divers with DCI who have left the water. 
Other surface incidents involve boats and boating incidents and 
divers who are lost but on the surface. 
 
The depth profiles are consistent with previous years. 
 
 
Diver qualifications 
The next two charts show the qualification of those BSAC 
members who were involved in reported incidents.    
The first looks at the diver qualification. 
 
 
Qualification of the divers involved in incidents 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
1st Class
Advanced
Dive Leader
Sport s Diver
Club/Ocean
Novice
Snorkel
  
 
 
These data are in line with the normal pattern of previous years 
and are thought to reflect the number of divers in these 
qualification grades. 
 
 
The next chart shows an analysis of incident by instructor 
qualification and again it is consistent with previous years.  
  
 
 
Qualification of instructors involved in incidents 
0 10 20 30 40
National
Advanced
Open Water
Club
Assistant
Snorkel
Unknown
  
 
The low number for ‘Club’ instructor reflects the fact that this 
qualification is no longer part of the instructor development 
programme.   
Divers’ use of the Emergency Services 
Divers’ use of the emergency services shows a monthly 
distribution aligned to the distribution of all incidents, and is 
clearly correlated with the number of dives that are taking place.  
These charts reflect the March to June depression that was 
highlighted earlier in the report. 
 
148 incidents were reported to us by the Coastguard.  The 
average number of incidents reported by the Coastguard in 
recent years is just over 200.  This picture supports the 
conclusion that there was less diving than normal in the spring 
and early summer months this year. 
 
 
 
Incidents involving the UK Coastguard Agency 
 - Monthly breakdown 
Oc
t. '
12 No
v. De
c.
Jan
. '1
3
Fe
b.
M
ar. Ap
r. M
ay Ju
ne Ju
ly
Au
g. Se
pt.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Incidents invo lving HM Coastguard: 148   
 
 
 
There were 66 incidents reported that involved the RNLI.  
Earlier years had seen a steady decline in divers’ need for 
lifeboat assistance.  However the previous three years saw that 
trend reversed.  This year's total is in line with the earlier 
downward trend.   
The RNLI’s main support to divers involves assistance with 
disabled boats, searching for missing divers and the recovery of 
divers with DCI.   
These data also reflect the dip in the first half of the year. 
 
 
 
Divers’ use of RNLI facilities by month 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In 2013 71 incidents involved the use of helicopters.  This is 
lower than normal and again reflects the reduced number of 
dives that have taken place.  
 
Number of instructors 
Number of divers 
Oc
t. '
12 No
v. De
c.
Jan
. '1
3
Fe
b.
Ma
r. Ap
r.
Ma
y
Ju
ne Jul
y
Au
g.
Sep
t. 0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Incidents involving Li feboats: 66

   NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
4        ©BSAC - 2013 
In diving related incidents helicopters are mainly tasked to 
support searches for missing divers and to transport divers with 
DCI to recompression facilities.   
 
 
 
Divers’ use of SAR helicopters by month 
Oc
t. '
12 No
v. De
c.
Ja
n. 
'13 Fe
b.
M
ar. Ap
r. M
ay Ju
ne Ju
ly
Au
g.
Se
pt.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Incidents invo lving helicopters: 71   
Fatalities 
14 fatal incidents occurred in the UK during the 2013 incident 
year.  This is slightly below the average of 15 fatalities per year 
over the previous ten years.  However, given the small numbers 
involved, this is not thought to be a significant difference.   
 
5 of these people were BSAC members.  The previous ten year 
average for BSAC fatalities in the UK is 6.2 fatalities per year. 
 
9 of the year's fatalities were non-BSAC members.  The 
previous ten year average for this group is 8.8.  So this year's 
total is normal. 
 
Key factors associated with these fatalities can be summarised 
as follows:- 
? Three cases involved divers who suffered a 'non-diving' 
related medical incident (for example a heart attack) whilst 
in the water.  Additionally there is one other case where it 
seems very likely that the diver suffered a 'medical event' 
whilst underwater, although evidence to substantiate this 
assumption is not currently available.   
? Four cases involved a separation of some kind.  In all 
except one case it seems that the separation was an 
unintentional result of other problems that the divers were 
experiencing. Separation in itself is not a cause of death but 
death might have been avoided if the casualties' buddies 
had been with them and thus potentially able to render 
assistance. 
? Three cases involved divers who were unable to gain or 
maintain positive buoyancy when it was necessary and they 
sank as a result.   
? Three cases involved divers diving in a group of three.  
Diving in groups of three (or more) brings additional 
complexity to a dive and can generate problems that don't 
exist with pair diving.  However, it is not clear how much trio 
diving directly contributed to these three fatalities.  BSAC 
recognises that, at times, it is necessary to dive in a group 
of three and guidelines will shortly be issued on this subject.  
Never-the-less pair diving will remain the strongly preferred 
option.   
? Two cases involved divers who were diving alone.  
Additionally there is a third case where the diver was either 
diving solo or became separated whilst underwater; the 
situation is currently unclear.  This diver was eventually 
found on the seabed, tangled in rope.  Solo diving obviously 
removes the possibility that a buddy could assist if a diver 
gets into difficulties.   
 
? One case involved a diver who was using a rebreather.  It is 
not clear if the rebreather or its use was a primary factor in 
the incident.  In previous years rebreather use has featured 
more prominently.   
? One case involved a dive to a maximum depth of 54m. 
Usually depths greater than 50m feature more strongly in 
the fatal incidents.   
? One case involved a diver who entered the water with his 
gas supply turned off. 
? One case involved a double fatality where the divers were 
recovered from the seabed nine days later.  Very little is 
currently known about this incident.   
 
Often multiple causes are involved in an incident. 
With a number of these fatal incidents there is currently 
insufficient information available to be clear about the exact 
chain of events and specific root causes.  Often new 
information comes to light (from coroners’ inquests for example) 
after the publication of the annual report.  Such information is 
added to the incident database for future research purposes.   
 
Another feature worthy of note in relation to these fatalities is 
that five of them occurred in May (see chart page 7). Given the 
reduced amount of diving that was taking place in May, one 
might have expected a low number of serious incidents.  Only 
43 incidents were reported in May and 12% of them were 
fatalities.  This could simply be an anomaly caused by chance 
and small numbers, or it could be an indicator that more care is 
required when undertaking one's first dives of the new diving 
season; it is probably a combination of both of these 
possibilities. 
 
Diver age has been highlighted in recent years as a feature of 
note in fatal incidents, with a disproportionate rate of fatalities 
amongst older divers.  This year that trend continues.   7 (50%) 
of the 2013 fatalities involved divers over the age of 50 (and 1 
was actually 50).  One suggested explanation for this is that the 
diving population overall is aging and thus the average of 
fatalities is bound to be rising.  To throw further light on this a 
study of average diver age has been conducted.  The chart 
below shows the background age of divers taken from the 
database (5250 data points)  compared with the average age of 
fatalities from 1998 to the current year, where the age is known 
(244 data points).  The incident database records (where 
known) the ages of all of those involved in diving incidents - the 
subjects of the incident, their buddies, rescuing divers and 
anyone else involved in the event.  Thus it can be assumed that 
this information is a representitive sample of all UK sports 
diving.   
Divers' average age 
 
30
40
50
60
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03
200
4
20
05
20
06
20
07
20
08
20
09
20
10
20
11
20
12
20
13
Background
Fatality
  
 
Calendar year 

 NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
©BSAC - 2013    5 
 
 
Straight trend lines have been added to both sets of data.  
It can be seen that the average age of the diving population has 
been steadily increasing, growing from around 36 in 1998 to 44 
in 2013; a rate of 0.53 years/year.  Whilst at the same time the 
average age of fatalities has risen from 39 to 54 a rate of 1 
year/year.  This trend was first identified in 2009 and the chart 
clearly shows the reason for this.  Up until 2008 is seemed quite 
plausible that the average age of fatalities was simply tracking 
the background average age albeit with a 5 year age off-set; a 
very understandable proposal.   However from 2009 onwards it 
became evident that this is not the true picture; the evidence of 
the last five years have confirmed the suspicions raised in 
2009.  The evidence currently available indicates that the age of 
the average fatality is increasing at almost twice the rate of the 
background age of the diving population in the UK.   
The factors behind these findings are not fully understood and 
further study is necessary. 
 
The natural tendency is for health and fitness to decline with 
increasing age and the above numbers seem to indicate that 
divers need to pay more attention to these aspects as they grow 
older. 
A natural and obvious response to this is to consider mandatory 
medicals.  However, expert diving medical opinion is that it is 
not possible to screen for latent medical problems.  Accurate 
and honest reporting in the medical declaration form and 
subsequent follow-up, if necessary, is the correct approach.  
This is the current policy advocated by BSAC and others. 
 
 
Decompression incidents 
The BSAC database contains 91 reports of ‘DCI’ incidents in 
the 2013 incident year, some of which involved more than one 
casualty.  When these multiple cases are counted the result is 
101 cases of DCI. 
 
An analysis of the causal factors associated with the 91 
incidents reported in 2013 indicates the following major 
features:- 
38 involved repeat diving  
15 involved rapid ascents 
13 involved diving to deeper than 30m 
13 involved missed decompression stops  
Some cases involved more than one of these factors. 
 
The content and order of this list is virtually identical to previous 
years. 
In addition to these factors there seems to be a growing number 
of reversed profile dives; dives where subsequent dives are 
deeper than earlier ones.  This is contrary to recommended 
practice and is a feature that we will be monitoring more closely.  
 
We know that we do not capture all of the DCI related incidents 
but the sample that is captured in this report is sufficiently large  
to develop a good understanding of the underlying causal 
factors.   
 
As stated earlier, some of the ‘Injury and Illness’ incidents are 
also thought to be DCI related.   
 
Boating and Surface incidents 
The number of incidents reported in 2013 has dropped back to 
earlier levels with a total of 55 incidents recorded.  The factors 
associated with these incidents are as follows:- 
 28 involved lost diver(s) 
 24 involved engine problems 
   8 involved boat problems 
   2 involved bad seamanship 
Some cases involved more than one of these factors. 
 
 
 
Ascent related incidents 
Ascent related incidents have been falling in recent years and 
this year sees that trend continuing with 43 cases reported.  As 
in previous years the majority of these were ‘rapid ascents’.   
An analysis of these ‘rapid ascents’ (where the detail is known) 
is as follows:- 
 42% Simply poor buoyancy control  
 23% Regulator free flows  
 16% Drysuit control malfunction/mis-use  
  13% Delayed SMB problems 
  13% Out of air / gas 
 10% Panic / anxiety / rush for surface 
 10% Weighting or weight related issues 
              
The percentages may vary but the causal factors behind 
abnormal ascents have remained unchanged for many years. 
 
It is certain that many other such cases have gone un-reported 
but it is anticipated that these root causes will apply to all 
uncontrolled ascents.   
 
Many DCI cases have their origins in these problems; they have 
been recorded under the ‘DCI’ heading but the causal factors 
are the same, so the actual number of abnormal ascents 
recorded will be significantly higher than 43 cases.   
This year’s DCI cases included 15 incidents where rapid 
ascents had taken place. 
 
 
Conclusions 
Key conclusions are:- 
? The number of incidents reported this year is about 29% 
lower than the level of recent years and it follows the trend 
noted in 2012.  This reduction is due to a lower number of 
incidents reported in the period March to June.  It is 
believed that this was caused by the very poor weather 
conditions in the UK during this period resulting in a 
reduced amount of diving taking place.   
? The number of fatalities of BSAC members is slightly below  
the average of the previous 10 years. 
? The number of fatalities of non-BSAC members is in line 
with the average of the previous 10 years. 
? The causal factors associated with these fatalities and other 
incidents are very similar to those seen over a number of 
years; no new causal factors have been identified.  
? Diver age and related health and fitness issues are still 
featuring as critical factors in this and recent years’ 
fatalities.  The average age of the subjects of this year’s 
diving fatalities was 52.2.  The average age of the 
background diving population in 2013 is 42.5.   
? Incidents of DCI continue to fall. 
? Ascent related incidents continue to reduce. 
? Incidents relating to 'Boating & Surface' events have 
dropped back to earlier levels.  
? The above conclusions need to be viewed in the light of a 
probable overall reduction in the amount of UK diving that 
has taken place in this period.   
 
 
As has been stated many times before, most of the incidents 
reported within this document could have been avoided had 
those involved followed a few basic principles of safe diving 
practice.  BSAC publishes a booklet called 'Safe Diving' (new 
edition imminent) which summarises all the key elements of 
safe diving and is available to all, free of charge, from the BSAC 
website or through BSAC HQ. 
 
 
 

   NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
6        ©BSAC - 2013 
 
Remember you can never have too much practice and the 
further you stay away from the limits of your own personal 
capabilities the more likely you are to continue to enjoy your 
diving. 
 
Please browse through the details in this report and use them to 
learn from others’ mistakes. They have had the courage and 
generosity to record their experiences for publication, the least 
that we can do is to use this information to avoid similar 
problems. 
 
Finally, if you must have an incident please report it using our 
Incident Report form, available free via the BSAC website or 
from BSAC HQ. 
As always, your anonymity is assured – great care is taken to 
preserve the confidentiality of any personal information 
recorded in BSAC Incident Reports. 
 
 
 

 NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013  7 
Fatalities 
 
November 2012 13/011 
A diver was diving from a charter vessel with a group of seven 
other divers. After entering the water for a second dive the diver 
became ill and fell unconscious at 7m. The diver was recovered 
from the water and emergency services were alerted. An 
inshore RNLI lifeboat attended and returned the diver to shore 
whilst resuscitation efforts were made. The diver was airlifted by 
helicopter to hospital but did not survive. 
December 2012 13/016 
A group of three divers were diving together, one of them on a 
depth experience dive accompanied by an instructor and 
another diver. On reaching a maximum depth of 30m some silt 
was stirred up and one of the divers became agitated, grabbed 
hold of the instructor and the pair started to ascend. During the 
ascent the instructor was being pulled down by the distressed 
diver and ditched her own weightbelt but then became 
separated from the diver. As a result, the instructor ascended 
rapidly to the surface whilst the distressed diver sank. The third 
diver pursued the instructor to the surface where the alarm was 
raised and rescue divers mobilized to search for the missing 
diver. The missing diver was recovered and CPR attempts were 
made. The diver was airlifted to hospital where he was declared 
deceased. The other two divers, as well as one of the recovery 
divers who had suffered a free flow, were airlifted to a 
recompression chamber for treatment. 
January 2013 13/023 
The first time two student divers entered the water both had 
problems with one of their regulators, so the group got out of 
the water and went back to their vehicles.  One of the student's 
regulator was changed for a fresh one borrowed from the 
instructor.  The two students and their instructor re- 
entered the water from the shore. They did a bubble check at 
3m; all three were fine.  The two students led the way and the 
instructor followed slightly behind and above so both could be 
monitored.  Going down the slope both students gave frequent 
hand signals.  As the group approached the 50m mark, one of 
the students dropped slightly below to 52m and was signalled to 
come up to 50m.  Both students turned and started back at 
which point the student who had descended too far was in front 
of the instructor.  He grabbed hold of the instructor and 
signalled to go up.  As he grabbed hold of the instructor both 
divers dropped on to a slope at 54m.  The instructor made eye 
contact and slowed the student's breathing down because he 
was breathing heavily.  The student indicated to go up, 
instructor returned the signal and signalled to the second 
student to ascend.  The second student was buffeted by the 
bubbles so moved to one side at which point he lost sight of the 
troubled diver and instructor who had started to ascend more 
rapidly.  This was caused by the student finning very hard.  As 
the two divers approached the 40m mark the ascent became 
more rapid with their computers indicating the excess speed.  
The instructor was trying to slow the ascent by letting the air out 
of his own wing and the student's suit by pushing the shoulder 
dump.  They reached 30m and at this point the student let go of 
the instructor.  The instructor lost contact with the student so 
they separated with the instructor slightly above. The instructor 
made a grab for the student but missed.  The student looked 
stationary at this point; the instructor was still ascending but 
trying to slow down. The instructor reached the surface about 
24 min into the dive time, at which point the surface current 
moved him away from the ascent point. He searched for 
bubbles to descend on and gave the distress signal to the 
surface cover. He could not find any bubbles but he tried 
dropping down.  He could not equalize and was having trouble 
breathing.  He decided to swim back to the start point of the 
dive to try and track the path of the dive.  As he was returning 
back to the shore line the second student came to the surface 
having completed his necessary decompression stops; this was 
approximately 35 min into the dive.  The second student had 
not seen the casualty since they got separated at the bottom.  
Both looked again for bubbles to see if the casualty was 
completing a decompression stop.  Meanwhile surface cover 
had contacted the emergency services.  The instructor did a 
search dive to 55m until he ran out of dive time.  When he 
resurfaced the emergency services had started to arrive and 
were managing the situation.  Surface searches were 
conducted by the Coastguard, police, fire and rescue service, 
mountain rescue teams and an RAF helicopter. A police 
underwater search team conducted searches of the area but no 
sign of the missing diver was found and the search was called 
off when it became too dark. The search resumed the following 
day before being called off due to bad weather. The diver's 
body was recovered by police divers the following day. 
 
 
UK Fatalities - Monthly breakdown  
from October 2012 to September 2013  incl. 
 
 
Oc
t. '
12 No
v
De
c.
Ja
n. 
'13 Fe
b. M
ar
.
Ap
r. Ma
y
Ju
ne Jul
y Au
g.
Se
pt.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
March 2013 13/040 
A diver was reported to have been diving on an anchor of a 
fishing boat when the incident occurred. The diver was 
recovered to the shore where police and an ambulance 
attended. The diver was then airlifted by the Coastguard to 
hospital but despite efforts by hospital staff, was later 
pronounced deceased. 
May 2013 13/058 
The casualty was diving in a team of three.  They entered the 
water for their second dive of the day.  They did their final 
checks before descending.  The three divers descended to the 
bottom at 8m but at this point they noticed that the casualty was 
not with them anymore.  The two remaining divers searched for 
up to one minute and then slowly returned to the surface; the 
total dive time was 3 min.  On the surface they saw that the 
casualty was being towed, unconscious, to the boat.  The 
casualty was given oxygen and CPR until the helicopter arrived.  
The casualty was resuscitated on the helicopter but she died 
whilst in hospital the following morning. The instructor states 
that the coroner has informed them that the casualty suffered 
an arterial gas embolism.  Later that day the diver who had 

   NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
 
8        ©BSAC - 2013 
performed the in water rescue was taken to hospital suffering 
from shock. 
May 2013 13/057 
A student and instructor had conducted a first dive to 9m for 25 
min. After a surface interval of around thirty minutes the pair 
were preparing to dive again. The student was sitting on a 
bench kitting up. The instructor noticed the student started 
puffing for breath then saw him go blank and slump to his left. 
The instructor, with the assistance of another passing diver, de-
kitted the student and lowered him to the ground. The student 
was still breathing at this point and the instructor sent the other 
diver for help. Assistance arrived but as the student was being 
checked for breathing it stopped. CPR was commenced 
together with oxygen enriched rescue breaths. An AED was 
attached and the student was shocked a reported four times 
before the arrival of an ambulance. The student was then 
attended to by paramedics but was pronounced dead at the 
scene. A post mortem revealed that the student died of a heart 
attack. 
May 2013 13/071 
A diver and his buddy had descended to a maximum depth of 
19m. The pair remained together and the buddy monitored the 
diver closely for any problems during the early stages of the 
dive but none were apparent. Approximately 11 min into the 
dive the buddy lost sight of the diver and, having conducted a 
360 degree turn to look for him, saw the diver a short distance 
away and approached him. The diver seemed to be drifting 
upwards and was moving his arms as if to push himself back 
down and then he stopped moving and sank to the seabed. The 
buddy made contact and found the diver's eyes closed and he 
was unresponsive. The buddy raised the diver up to the surface 
using a controlled buoyant lift and immediately commenced 
rescue breaths and summoned help. The diver was recovered 
into one of the two RHIBs covering the diving group, CPR was 
commenced and the alarm raised. Oxygen was used for 
enhanced rescue breaths. An RNLI RHIB on a training exercise 
in the area responded and took the diver and one of the diving 
crew aboard to assist with CPR efforts. The diver was returned 
to shore to be met by a paramedic and then transferred to 
hospital where he was pronounced deceased. The diver's death 
was confirmed as being due to natural causes because of heart 
disease. 
May 2013 13/081 
Shetland MRCC received a call from a dive boat reporting two 
divers who had failed to surface after their dive in Scapa Flow, 
Orkney. The dive boat carried out a search in the immediate 
area of the dive site. Stromness RNLI lifeboat, and Coastguard 
rescue helicopter 102 were tasked and carried out a thorough 
search of the area, but the divers were not located. The Inter-
Island ferry, Hoy Head also assisted in the search while on 
passage.  The search resumed the following day. A police 
diving team were called in and conducted extensive ROV 
searches. The bodies of the two divers were located and 
recovered nine days later. 
July 2013 13/114 
A diver died after suffering a cardiac arrest while diving. police, 
paramedics and a search & rescue helicopter were called to the 
site but the diver was pronounced dead at the scene. (Media 
report). 
July 2013 13/133 
A diver had been reported as being in difficulty during a boat 
dive. The diver was reported as diving on his own with another 
person in the boat. An inshore lifeboat quickly found the diver 
face down in the sea. They recovered him into the lifeboat 
where they commenced CPR, took him ashore to the lifeboat 
station where CPR was continued until paramedics arrived and 
took over treatment of the diver. The diver was taken to hospital 
where he was pronounced dead. 
July 2013 13/141 
Aberdeen MRCC was contacted by a dive boat reporting a 
missing diver on a wreck dive. A thorough search was made in 
the area around the wreck and the diver was located on the 
seabed, apparently tangled in line, but other divers were unable 
to recover him immediately. Co-ordination for recovery of the 
diver was passed to the police.  The diver was recovered the 
following day by police divers.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
 
 
BSAC Fatalities against membership 1982-2013 
(UK fatalities only) 
19
82 198
4
19
86 198
8
199
0
19
92 199
4
19
96 199
8
200
0
20
02 200
4
20
06 200
8
201
0
20
12
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
BSAC UK Fatalities     Membership ('000)
 
 
August 2013 13/170 
A group of divers were preparing to dive an offshore reef from a 
charter boat. One pair intended to carry out a negative entry 
and descend direct to the reef without resurfacing. The first 
diver entered the water whilst the second was still adjusting his 
kit and he commenced his dive. The second diver entered the 
water and it was quickly apparent that his gas was not switched 
on and he surfaced briefly. The boat skipper noticed this and 
shouted at other divers to jump in and assist the diver. One 
diver already on the stern lift of the boat jumped in and grabbed 
the diver but was unable to keep hold as he was being dragged 
down quite quickly. A second diver descended and located the 
unconscious diver on the bottom but was unable to lift him 
immediately and had to remove his BCD in order to bring him to 
the surface. The rescuer and casualty ascended from a depth of 
36m to the surface in approximately 40 secs. The BCD was 
recovered by the first diver to enter the water to assist. On 
surfacing the casualty was recovered onto the charter boat and 
given CPR by the skipper and others on board for 30 - 40 min.  
Another charter boat in close vicinity spotted what was going on 
and contacted the Coastguard and co-ordinated 
communications.  A rescue helicopter was tasked and airlifted 
the casualty to hospital where he was declared deceased.  The 
diver who recovered the casualty was not taken by the 
helicopter but shortly after started to display symptoms of DCI 
following his fast ascent. A further emergency call was made 
and the diver was airlifted to a recompression facility for 
treatment. 
 

 NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013  9 
August 2013 13/171 
A group of divers were wreck diving from a charter boat twenty-
three miles off the coast. The last diver to enter the water 
noticed a rebreather diver on the shotline apparently 'fiddling' 
with his kit but his buddy, also a rebreather diver, was nearby 
and everything appeared to be under control so he continued 
with his dive. The buddy had noticed the diver bail out from his 
rebreather and appeared to have difficulty getting his regulator 
into his mouth and suddenly spat it out. The diver pushed it 
back into the distressed diver's mouth but he spat it out again. 
At this point the diver retrieved his bailout regulator, purged it in 
front of the distressed diver to demonstrate it had gas and then 
pushed into his mouth. A few moments later the distressed 
diver bit right through the mouthpiece and ejected the regulator. 
At this point the buddy decided to rescue the distressed diver to 
the surface by a controlled buoyant lift. Once at the surface both 
divers were recovered to the boat but as the distressed diver 
was unconscious and not breathing. CPR was immediately 
administered by the buddy whilst the Coastguard was alerted by 
a distress call. Thirty minutes later, during which time the buddy 
continued with CPR, the helicopter arrived to evacuate the diver 
to hospital where he was pronounced dead on arrival. The 
buddy, who was in shock and with possible DCI, was given 83% 
oxygen until a lifeboat arrived to take him to a hyperbaric facility 
where he was given precautionary recompression treatment 
and then discharged. 
 
 

   NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
 
10        ©BSAC - 2013 
Decompression Incidents 
 
October 2012 13/228 
Shetland coastguard received a call from a dive support vessel 
reporting they had a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI. 
The vessel was 25 min from harbour, the vessel was met by an 
ambulance and tasked to Balfour chamber for treatment.  
(Coastguard report). 
October 2012 13/229 
Shetland Coastguard received a call from a dive support vessel, 
reporting having a diver onboard who was suffering from 
symptoms of DCI. The vessel came alongside and the diver was 
taken to Balfour chamber for treatment by private transport.  
(Coastguard report). 
October 2012 13/004 
A diver conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 52m using open 
circuit trimix 18/35 for a total dive time of 83 min including 58 min 
of decompression stops using nitrox 60. The diver's buddies 
were using closed circuit rebreathers using 18/35 diluent gas. 
After returning to shore and changing, the diver complained of 
swelling and inflammation in her right upper arm, which had the 
appearance of an insect bite reaction but had a mottled rash 
extending from the swelling. A recompression chamber was 
contacted for advice and after discussion the diver was 
requested to attend the chamber for assessment. The diver was 
placed on oxygen and the rash was noticed to reduce. A 
lymphatic DCI was diagnosed and the diver was given a five 
hour recompression treatment followed by a further treatment the 
next day. 
October 2012 13/042 
A diver had completed four dives over a two day hardboat dive 
trip. All dives were completed without incident, all safety and 
decompression stops completed, ascents were slow and 
controlled, dives were low work effort and the conditions and 
visibility were good. The diver did however admit to feeling 
dehydrated and stressed that day. About ninety minutes after the 
last dive and whilst disembarking, the diver noticed a pain in the 
right shoulder together with a rash and was advised by the 
skipper it could be a minor skin DCI. The diver was put on 
oxygen and took fluids but the problem did not resolve so the 
diver went to a recompression chamber for advice and 
assessment. On arrival at the chamber, the diver still had the 
shoulder pain and rash and was becoming aware of a slight 
stiffness in the right knee and tingling in the right toe. The diver 
underwent two sessions of recompression treatment and all 
symptoms were resolved and the all clear given with the proviso 
of not diving for a month and not until after review by a diving 
doctor, which was subsequently successful. 
October 2012 13/006 
A diver and her buddy completed two dives without incident, the 
first to 20m for 37 min and, after a surface interval of 3hr 30 min, 
30m for 36 min including safety stops of 3 min at 4m. The diver 
was tired, cold and probably dehydrated prior to the second dive. 
Approximately an hour after surfacing from the second dive the 
diver noticed that her abdomen was very itchy and she had 
developed a raised reddish rash. Her club members thought it 
may have been a DCI and so placed her on oxygen. On 
approaching harbour it was decided to call a recompression 
chamber rather than the Coastguard but they were unable to 
contact them and on reaching shore decided to drive to the 
chamber. Whilst on route another club member called to say 
they had managed to contact the chamber and they were 
awaiting their arrival. Whilst on oxygen the rash improved and 
the itching stopped. The oxygen cylinder had only been partially 
full and so quickly ran out and on arrival at the chamber the rash 
was covering a larger area than previously. The diver received a 
six hour recompression treatment and a further two hour 
treatment the following day. The rash did not completely clear 
and the second treatment produced no further improvement and 
so the diver was discharged and referred for a PFO check. 
 
 
 
Decompression incidents by month 
Oc
t. '
12
No
v.
De
c.
Ja
n. 
'13 Fe
b.
Ma
r.
Ap
r.
M
ay
Ju
ne
Ju
ly
Au
g.
Se
pt.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
November 2012 13/012 
A diver and his more experienced buddy conducted a dive on a 
wreck from a private RHIB to a maximum depth of 20m for a total 
duration of 45 min including a precautionary safety stop at 6m for 
4 min. The diver was slightly buoyant during the stop and his 
depth fluctuated between 4m and 6m although he remained in 
control. After surfacing both divers were well and after ten 
minutes, during which the final pair of divers were recovered, the 
RHIB departed back to harbour. A few minutes after departure 
the diver began complaining of "sore kidneys on his right side" 
which it was believed may have been due to him pulling 
something when getting into the boat; he was kept under 
observation. Within a further five minutes the pain had worsened 
and the diver was placed on oxygen. A local chamber was called 
to seek advice during which time the diver's condition 
deteriorated and he began to complain of paralysis in his legs. At 
this point the boat was some ten to fifteen minutes from harbour 
and they decided not to call the Coastguard but an ambulance 
was called instead. On regaining harbour the diver was unable to 
walk, twenty-five minutes after the onset of symptoms. He was 
laid on the pontoon with legs elevated, placed on oxygen and 
remained conscious. An ambulance arrived within five minutes 
and they transported the diver to a nearby location from where a 
helicopter airlifted him to a recompression chamber for 
treatment. The diver underwent a seven hour recompression 
treatment and made a full recovery. 
December 2012 13/324 
No problems were noticed or reported by a student during a 
series of dives in confined water.  However, subsequently the 
instructor received a letter from the student's husband stating 
that she had felt symptoms of DCI as described in the diving 
manual, and that she had sought medical advice.  The casualty 
was treated in a recompression chamber and her symptoms 
alleviated. 
 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   11 
December 2012 13/325 
Two days after completing training dives in open water the 
casualty called her instructor to discuss the fatigue, neck and 
shoulder pain that she was having. The instructor advised that 
she must contact a recompression facility.  They recommended 
she went in to be examined. During this assessment they found 
out that the casualty had had an uncontrolled ascent on one of 
the dives which triggered her computer alarm and that she also 
felt cold during the dives. She was treated in the chamber for 
DCI and felt recovered afterwards. 
December 2012 13/020 
Two divers in a party of divers were rescued from a quarry. The 
buddy pair had some difficulties with their equipment, had to 
surface quickly and were thought to be suffering from DCI. The 
Coastguard was alerted and the rescue was co-ordinated by the 
police. The pair were airlifted to hospital as a precaution. 
February 2013 13/041 
A diver had completed three dives on the same day, two were 
training dives and the last was a leisure dive but with another 
diver and trainee who performed a controlled buoyant lift from 
6m to the surface before re-descending to 12m to finish the dive. 
Later that night the diver felt very tired and had some pain and 
tingling in the left arm. The next day, following a bad night's 
sleep, the diver still had pains in the left arm with numbness and 
tingling, still felt tired and dizzy and the left cheek and two right 
toes went numb. The diver went to hospital and was put on 
oxygen and the symptoms were resolved. The diver then 
attended a recompression chamber for three sessions of 
treatment and was signed off as fit to dive having made a full 
recovery but advised on safe diving practices. 
February 2013 13/238 
Belfast MRCC received a request from duty dive doctor, 
Aberdeen to activate hyperbaric chamber on the Isle of Cumbrae 
for a diver who was suffering from DCI. Cumbrae Coastguard 
rescue team tasked to assist with transfer of casualty.  
(Coastguard report). 
March 2013 13/032 
In the evening following two shallow dives to a maximum depth 
of 10m, a diver experienced pain in her right elbow but thought it 
was a strain from lifting equipment. The following day other 
symptoms appeared including aching all over her body, nausea, 
headache, an ache in her right elbow, feeling wobbly, dizzy and 
fatigued and she thought this was the onset of flu. The next day 
the diver was feeling less nauseous but still achy and with a rash 
on her arms. She still had a headache and was still feeling 
unwell. On advice she contacted a recompression chamber and 
they advised going to the nearest hospital and to be informed of 
her arrival once there. After a three hour delay in the hospital the 
diver was placed on oxygen, had blood tests and a chest x-ray 
before being taken to the recompression chamber. Subsequent 
treatment was recompression once a day for five days and the 
diver was discharged fully recovered. A PFO was suspected and 
the diver was awaiting further tests. 
April 2013 13/043 
A diver completed seven dives over the four day Easter period. 
None of the dives involved unusual incidents and were within 
dive tables, a computer and the diver's maximum depth of 35m. 
All dives were non decompression and 3 min safety stops were 
carried out. The diver returned home and that evening noticed a 
mild discomfort in the right shoulder and mild loss of sensation in 
three fingers of the right hand. The diver put this down to fatigue 
from a long journey home and the physical exertion of the diving 
weekend. The symptoms remained the next day and did not 
worsen but were still present the following day. The diver 
contacted a recompression chamber for advice and they advised 
attending the facility for a check up. The diagnosis was that the 
symptoms were possibly a very mild DCI or that the diver had 
pulled a muscle in the shoulder. The diver was recompressed 
and the discomfort in the shoulder slightly alleviated but over the 
next couple of days all symptoms were resolved. The diver was 
advised to avoid diving for four weeks and get a check up with a 
medical referee before diving again. 
April 2013 13/073 
Two divers carried out a first dive to 30m. After a gradual 
descent one of the divers carried out a regulator switch but it 
began to free flow. He signalled to abort the dive which they did 
immediately. The ascent was a little quick but controlled 
sufficiently so that neither diver's computer registered an alarm. 
Following a surface interval of over two hours the divers carried 
out another dive to 30m for 30 min and a further dive to 25m for 
25 min. Two days later one of the divers felt 'woozy', with low 
dexterity and tiredness. He called a hyperbaric chamber and they 
advised him to come in for a check up. The diver was diagnosed 
with neurological and constitutional DCI and received two 
sessions of recompression treatment. Following the treatment 
and during a consultation with the diving doctor, the diver 
complained of recent dehydration. This led to a diagnosis of 
adult onset type one diabetes, the dehydrating effects of which 
predisposed the diver to the recent DCI. 
April 2013 13/078 
An instructor and two trainees were on a training dive with a 
controlled buoyant lift exercise being carried out at the end of the 
dive. One of the trainees was lifting a fellow student but lost 
control of the ascent from 5m. Immediately after surfacing, the 
student complained of a headache. Later that evening, as the 
headache had not subsided, the student was taken to a 
recompression chamber for treatment. 
April 2013 13/046 
On the second day of a diving weekend and about twenty 
minutes after completion of a dive, a diver felt sick and dizzy. It 
was assumed she was hungry and thirsty as she had eaten very 
little breakfast and not had much to drink. She was given a small 
amount of sugary food, a drink and a check on hand to eye co-
ordination which showed no symptoms of DCI. The diver 
remained coherent and articulate but as her condition did not 
change and she had also been physically sick, she was put on 
oxygen and fluids. A check on her dive computer showed the 
dive was normal with good descents and ascents. With no 
improvement in the diver's condition, contact was made with a 
decompression chamber for advice and arrangements were 
made for contact with a local hyperbaric unit. Following a 
telephone conversation with the diver, the local chamber's doctor 
said the initial assessment was an inner ear barotrauma and 
advised her to come into their facility. At the chamber the 
diagnosis of inner ear DCI was confirmed. Interrogation of the 
diver's computer showed that the first day of diving involved 
three dives, the first one was aborted after 4 min and the 
following two dives to 16m showed two ascents per dive from 
12m to 6m practising the use of an alternative source. Due to 
previous problems with equalization the diver had taken an 
decongestant tablet on both days. The diver was recompressed 
and she was sixty percent better compared to her condition on 
arrival. She was advised to take total bed rest until complete 
resolution of symptoms and thereafter to avoid any physical 
exertion for up to a week to allow the trauma to heal. The diver 
would be seen for review one month from end of treatment and 
advised not to dive or fly during this period. She was also warned 
against the use of decongestants before diving. 

   NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
 
12        ©BSAC - 2013 
April 2013 13/049 
On the first dive of the day two divers were practising compass 
skills supervised by a dive leader. Three of the four bearings 
took the divers to their intended spot but an error on the fourth 
bearing took them to a unintended location. On checking their air 
one of the divers signalled they were beginning to get low and 
did not have enough to complete the dive plan. The dive leader 
took over and signalled a direction of travel to reach a wall and 
ascend there. En-route to the wall both divers signalled to the 
dive leader they were now low on air at which point the dive 
leader deployed her DSMB but her octopus regulator free flowed. 
With two divers low on air and as the free flow could not be 
stopped, the dive leader signalled to ascend. All the divers 
reached the surface but the ascent was rapid. About thirty 
minutes later, the dive leader experienced numbness in one 
finger and one of the other divers complained of chest pain. First 
aid oxygen was given and all three divers had treatment in a 
recompression chamber. 
April 2013 13/125 
A diver had completed three dives on a Saturday and later that 
evening felt a sharp pain in his right knee which he put down to a 
strain from carrying kit during the day. On the Sunday, the diver 
carried out two further dives and still had some pain in the knee 
but not enough to cause concern. During the rest of the week the 
pain seemed to be easing but on the Saturday evening, following 
a short walk, the diver experienced a severe sharp pain in the 
knee which continued throughout the night. Thinking it might now 
be diving related, the diver contacted a hyperbaric chamber and 
the doctor advised him to attend as soon as possible and the 
diver received recompression treatment. The knee pain lessened 
slightly in the chamber and the diver was given the first of a 
course of anti-inflammatories. The diver received two further 
sessions of treatment and the knee pain reduced slightly and 
then subsequently fully resolved. There was no conclusive 
decision as to whether the pain had been diving related. 
Although the pain had reduced over three days of treatment it 
could have been due to the anti-inflammatories or simply due to 
the rest taken over the three days. 
April 2013 13/123 
An instructor and two trainees had completed five dives over a 
weekend. No symptoms were felt immediately following diving 
however, on the Monday, the instructor experienced numbness 
in the left hand together with joint pain in the left knee. A 
hyperbaric chamber was contacted, DCI diagnosed and the diver 
received recompression treatment. It is believed that the DCI 
was due to a rapid ascent experienced on the final dive of the 
weekend when the instructor was attempting to arrest the ascent 
of a trainee. The trainees exhibited no symptoms of DCI. 
May 2013 13/063 
Whilst driving home following a mixed gas rebreather course, a 
diver experienced discomfort and swelling to his upper arm. The 
following day the swelling and discomfort became progressively 
worse and he contacted a hyperbaric centre. He attended the 
centre and was diagnosed with a lymphatic DCI. He underwent 
recompression treatment with a minor improvement in his 
symptoms and, having stayed overnight in hospital, underwent 
further treatment the next day. The swelling was progressively 
moving down his arm and the discomfort improving. The 
hyperbaric centre discharged the diver but, as the diver appears 
to have had a lymphatic DCI previously, they were to contact him 
offering a test for PFO. 
 
 
 
 
May 2013 13/243 
Portland MRCC tasked Poole CRT to prepare the HLS at Poole 
to assist the helimed aircraft which was inbound with a diver 
suffering from DCI. The diver was landed safely and taken to the 
recompression chamber by ambulance.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2013 13/075 
A trainee diver completed five training dives over a two day 
period. Two dives were undertaken on the first day and three 
dives on the second day. All five dives were completed without 
incident and within tables. The following day the diver 
experienced some discomfort and 'pins and needles' in his right 
shoulder. As he had previously injured this shoulder in an 
accident  four years earlier, he initially took no action. However, 
when the symptoms worsened during the day, he contacted the 
instructor he had been diving with to alert her to the situation and 
seek advice. The instructor referred him to a hyperbaric chamber 
and the diver was called in for an assessment. The diver was 
given three sessions of recompression treatment as he was 
diagnosed with a mild case of DCI and that the diver's previous 
shoulder injury had been a contributory factor. The chamber 
advised the diver to refrain from diving for a month and to 
complete all subsequent dives on nitrox using air tables. 
May 2013 13/064 
A diver became separated from his buddies around 25 min into a 
wreck dive. Whilst trying to locate them he disturbed the silty 
seabed and became disorientated. Because he was away from 
the shotline and with foggy conditions on the surface, the diver 
realised he was going to have to deploy his DSMB before he 
drifted away from the wreck. He was beginning to hyperventilate 
but settled on the seabed and with still no buddies visible 
deployed his DSMB. On reaching 20m, worrying about the 
ascent, being seen once he surfaced and struggling with 
buoyancy, he lost control and made a fast ascent to the surface. 
His maximum depth was 31m and his dive duration 30 min.  The 
diver was recovered to the boat and first aid oxygen was 
administered. Contact was made with a recompression chamber 
and the diver referred for treatment. Suspected DCI was 
diagnosed and the diver underwent recompression treatment. 
May 2013 13/061 
Portland MRCC tasked Coastguard helicopter rescue R-106 to a 
dive support vessel after they reported having a diver onboard 
who was showing symptoms of DCI following a dive 
approximately 4nm south of Burton Bradstock.  The symptoms 
were 'pins and needles' at the base of the spine and at the top of 
the legs. The diver and his buddy were airlifted to Poole 
helicopter landing site to be met by an ambulance, dive doctor 
and Poole CRT, then transferred to the recompression chamber 
for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2013 13/069 
Stornoway MRCC received a call on channel 16 VHF reporting 
entering Tobermory Harbour, Isle of Mull with a dive casualty 
onboard. An ambulance and Tobermory CRT were tasked to 
meet the vessel. A medilink call was established with the dive 
doctor in Aberdeen, who recommended transfer to hospital by 
road and sea. The ambulance service tasked a helimed aircraft 
to uplift the casualty and his dive buddy, who was also feeling 
symptoms, to hospital.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
May 2013 13/084 
A diver completed two dives and although feeling very tired, left 
the dive site. About three hours later he developed a headache, 
pain in the right shoulder, elbow and knee as well as in two 
fingers of his right hand. A hyperbaric unit was contacted and 
they referred the diver to a recompression facility. On arrival at 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   13 
the facility the diver was diagnosed with DCI and underwent 
recompression treatment and his headache and pains resolved. 
Following a night in hospital, the diver was re-assessed and 
underwent a further session of recompression treatment after 
which he was symptom-free and discharged home. 
May 2013 13/077 
A diver had completed a morning dive with no problems until the 
ascent when she experienced ear pain. Back on the surface the 
ear pain lessened to a slight throb and was uncomfortable but 
she still could not equalise. The diver returned to the shore and 
began to feel sick and had a pain in her elbow which then went 
to her shoulder. The diver was put on oxygen and medical 
assistance summoned. A paramedic arrived and arrangements 
were made to airlift the diver to a recompression chamber. The 
diver received recompression treatment for DCI and was also 
being sent for a scan for suspected PFO. 
May 2013 13/079 
Following a wreck dive to a maximum depth of 53m for 75 min, a 
trimix rebreather diver developed signs of DCI. Portland MRCC 
tasked Coastguard helicopter rescue 106 to airlift the diver from 
his vessel near West Bay, Dorset to a recompression chamber 
for treatment. Poole Coastguard rescue officers met the 
helicopter at the Whitecliffe landing site, Poole and West Bay 
Coastguard rescue officers met the vessel when it returned to 
West Bay harbour.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2013 13/110 
A diver had completed five training dives over a weekend, three 
on the first day and two on the second. All dives were completed 
within the normal limits of his dive computer with no mandatory 
decompression stops, rapid ascents or other major buoyancy 
issues involved. When returning home the diver felt tired but this 
seemed normal given the weekend's activity. The following day 
the diver was aware of 'pins and needles' in his back and left leg 
together with a feeling of being unable to fully concentrate. 
However, the diver attributed this to possible fatigue and perhaps 
back strain from the weekend's diving, carrying cylinders etc. 
The next day the diver was still experiencing all the symptoms 
and called a hyperbaric chamber for advice. The chamber 
recommended that the diver come in and after seeing the doctor 
the diver received recompression treatment for DCI. The 
treatment seemed to improve the symptoms though not 
completely resolve them so the diver underwent three further 
treatments. All the symptoms appeared to be completely 
resolved. 
May 2013 13/089 
Two divers descended to 19m but the dive leader reported that a 
current at depth, against which they could not fin, forced them to 
a depth of 27m. This depth was maintained for the duration of 
the dive and the dive leader, whilst acknowledging this was 
greater than the depth limit for his less experienced buddy, 
considered there was no risk to either diver. The divers were 
connected by a buddy line as the visibility at depth was 
considered inadequate for safe diving. At the agreed cylinder 
pressure, the divers began their ascent with both their computers 
indicating no decompression requirement. The buddy had used 
his BCD for buoyancy at depth but on the ascent only vented air 
from his drysuit. As his buoyancy increased and still connected 
by the buddy line, both divers made a rapid ascent to the 
surface. Both of the divers' computers 'locked out' at the surface 
indicating rapid ascent danger. As it was the second dive of the 
day for the dive leader, he was administered emergency oxygen 
on the boat as it returned to shore. Neither diver reported any 
symptoms of DCI but on reaching the shore the dive manager 
sought medical advice and both divers were sent to a  
 
recompression chamber. On the journey to the chamber, the 
buddy complained of feeling very itchy on his chest and back. 
After medical examination both divers received recompression 
treatment and were told to refrain from diving activities for at 
least six weeks. 
May 2013 13/131 
A diver completed  thirteen dives between 18m to 43m over the 
course of a week's diving finishing on a Friday. The following day 
the diver developed pain in his right elbow with pain later 
presenting in his right shoulder. Oxygen was administered and a 
hyperbaric centre contacted. The diver was admitted and 
received recompression treatment with a second treatment the 
following day. 
May 2013 13/100 
On the second day of a diving holiday a diver completed a no 
stop dive to 34m and a safety stop at 6m for 3 min. Back on the 
boat a diver complained that his equipment felt heavy and his 
legs felt like jelly. The diver was helped to de-kit, made to lie 
down and put on oxygen. The decision was made to send the 
diver to a recompression facility although the diver reported his 
condition to be improving. The diver was picked up by 
ambulance, delivered to the hyperbaric unit and underwent 
recompression treatment. The diver felt fine afterwards but was 
advised to have a check for PFO which he did but no PFO was 
detected. The cause of the incident could possibly have been the 
diver being over-weighted or possibly exhaustion as he had 
driven over 600 miles two days earlier with little sleep. 
May 2013 13/056 
After three uneventful boat dives over a two day period, a diver 
developed very mild DCI symptoms the following day. Following 
medical advice, the diver received recompression treatment and 
all symptoms were resolved. 
May 2013 13/251 
Shetland MRCC received a call from a dive boat reporting a 
diver with mild DCI symptoms. Casualty was brought into Houton 
pier and taken to Stromness hyperbaric chamber by ambulance. 
Stromness CRT were called to the pier to assist the vessel.  
(Coastguard report). 
 
 
 
Percentage analysis of factors involved in 
cases of DCI 
 
0 10 20 30 40
Percentage Occurrence 
Missed stops  
D ive >30m  
Rapid Ascent  
Wi thin  L imits  
Repeat Dives  
 

   NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
 
14        ©BSAC - 2013 
June 2013 13/254 
Solent MRCC tasked Coastguard helicopter R-104 to airlift a 47 
year old diver suffering with DCI from a dive boat and transferred 
her to St.Richard's hospital, Chichester. Selsey Coastguard 
attended the HLS.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2013 13/103 
An instructor and two students were on the second dive of the 
day carrying out SMB drills. The SMB got tangled with a lobster 
pot marker on the surface so the lesson stopped. At this point 
one of the students was having difficulty with his fin and drysuit 
boot and was unable to refit his foot into the boot. However, this 
was apparently not communicated to the instructor as he was 
unaware of the problem. Unable to manoeuvre the SMB, the 
instructor decided to show the students how to use the SMB's 
reel and line as a distance line. The line was tied off to some 
rocks and the three divers reeled out and returned to the start 
point. The student with the fin and drysuit boot problem was now 
low on air and the group started to ascend, taking it in turns to 
use the SMB reel. At around 10m, the student with the boot 
problem was ascending too quickly and despite the instructor 
indicating he should slow down, the student could not control his 
rate of ascent. The instructor went to assist but both of them 
ended up on the surface quickly followed by the second student 
who had been given the signal to ascend by the instructor. The 
second student was blowing out hard as she rose to the surface 
missing a 1 min decompression stop. The group were recovered 
to the dive RHIB. The second student complained of a headache 
but this went away after 10 min and she helped recover other 
divers' kit into the boat following their dive. When she got back to 
shore she experienced 'pins and needles' in her hands and on 
the way home found them to be quite painful but put this down to 
her tight drysuit. At home she was still experiencing 'pins and 
needles' and noticed a rash on her shoulder. She contacted the 
instructor who advised her to phone the hospital who told her to 
attend a hyperbaric chamber as soon as possible. At the 
chamber the student was assessed with DCI and underwent 
three sessions of recompression treatment over three days. A 
possible PFO was being investigated. 
June 2013 13/102 
On the last day of a three day dive trip, two divers were 
ascending from a 21m wreck dive on a DSMB. One of the divers 
performed a regular ascent with a shorter than planned 2 min 
safety stop but the buddy got caught in the drift tide and current 
resulting in an uncontrolled ascent from 15m but maintained a 
hold on the DSMB line. On the surface the buddy raised the 
alarm that she had missed her safety stop and was recovered to 
the dive boat. The buddy was immediately assessed and 
complained of 'tingling' and pain in her legs and hands and was 
put on first aid oxygen. The Coastguard was contacted and a 
lifeboat was dispatched with a further supply of oxygen. The 
other diver was also assessed but was not displaying any 
symptoms. The buddy reported that the symptoms in her legs 
were increasing as well as spreading to her upper limbs, most 
specifically her elbows. The Coastguard decided evacuation by 
helicopter was required and this was despatched. Two local dive 
boats in the vicinity donated their oxygen kits and the lifeboat 
arrived. Both divers were evacuated by helicopter and taken to a 
recompression chamber. The diver was assessed and with no 
symptoms of DCI was discharged that day. The buddy was 
confirmed as suffering from DCI and was recompressed with 
three sessions over three days and made a full recovery. 
June 2013 13/328 
The casualty participated in five training dives over two days.  
The dives were within no-deco limits, included safety stops and 
there were no apparent incidents.  The morning of the third day 
 
 
the casualty had a pain in his arm and he had difficulty 
concentrating throughout the day.  He contacted the a hyperbaric 
facility and was admitted for recompression treatment. 
June 2013 13/258 
Falmouth MRCC tasked rescue helicopter R-193 to carry out the 
medical transfer of a 40 year old Belgian diver suffering from 
suspected DCI from Porthkerris to DDRC, Plymouth.  
(Coastguard report). 
June 2013 13/135 
A diver had been diving for six consecutive days on a hardboat 
dive trip. Two dives a day were carried out using air and were 
within computer limits with no alarms showing on downloaded 
dive profiles. Decompression stops were in excess of the 
minimum required by the computer. Of the twelve dives carried 
out the deepest was to 40m on the third day and six of the dives 
were deeper than 30m but most were shelving reefs or wrecks 
allowing for gradual ascents. Surfacing from the last dive nothing 
was apparent and the diver helped in unloading the boat along 
with the rest of the group. Back at her accommodation the diver 
noticed a rash on her upper right arm and shoulder and 
suspected it was a skin DCI but with no other symptoms present 
and with the rash fading, she did not want to worry her non-
diving partner but did inform the rest of the diving party. The 
following day the diver had swelling to her right upper arm and 
shoulder together with some pain. The other divers insisted she 
tell her partner and they telephoned a decompression help line 
for assistance. The advice was that the diver should attend the 
local hospital where she was examined by the duty doctor in 
consultation with the decompression help line doctor. The diver 
was evacuated by helicopter to a recompression chamber and 
diagnosed with a rare lymphatic tissue and neurological DCI and 
underwent eight sessions of recompression treatment. The diver 
was advised not to dive for three months and to be medically 
assessed before diving again. 
June 2013 13/107 
A diver completed two dives to 21m with a surface interval of 2 
hours 5 min between the dives. Leaving 21m on the second dive, 
his computer stated that he had 11 min of no stop time remaining 
but he carried out a 3 min safety stop. Whilst de-kitting, he pulled 
his drysuit neck seal over his head but when he came to pull off 
his right cuff seal with his left hand he experienced a sharp pain 
on the left side of his neck, which he initially thought was a 
'crick'. He then experienced a severe burning pain from his neck, 
down his arm and to the bottom of the deltoid muscle in his 
shoulder. He thought it was the 'crick' radiating so sat down for a 
short while. After a few minutes, the diver stood up to tidy his 
gear away and found that his left leg had gone 'wobbly' to the 
point where he was not confident he could walk on it. With his 
buddy's assistance the diver was put on first aid oxygen for 
twenty minutes. After the first five to ten minutes the pain in his 
shoulder subsided and his leg felt better. Contact was made with 
a hyperbaric unit and the diver was told to go to a recompression 
facility where he underwent treatment for DCI. The diver was 
also arranging a PFO check. 
June 2013 13/259 
Stornoway MRCC received a call from a dive boat reporting that 
they had a diver aboard showing signs of DCI.  A medilink call 
was established with the dive doctor from ARI.  Doctor requested 
the diver be taken to Lorne & Islands Hospital, Oban by 
Coastguard helicopter R-100. The diver was transferred to an 
awaiting ambulance by R-100.  (Coastguard report). 
 
 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   15 
June 2013 13/329 
The casualty was completing an enriched air nitrox course.  
During the course he lost control of his buoyancy and omitted a 
safety stop, however his computer indicated that he could 
continue diving and he felt fine.  That evening he started feeling 
some numbness in his fingertips. The symptoms became more 
pronounced and he sought medical advice two day later.  He 
was advised to go to a recompression chamber.  He completed 
recompression treatment and was advised not to dive for one 
month. 
June 2013 13/261 
Portland MRCC tasked coastguard helicopter R-106 to the 
National Diving Centre at Chepstow to evacuate a diver. The 
casualty was going to be landed at Poole for recompression 
treatment. Poole Coastguards manned the landing site and 
South Western Ambulance and the recompression chamber 
were alerted. R-106 helicopter was stood down as an air 
ambulance did the job instead.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2013 13/105 
A lifeboat took a diver to hospital as he was suffering the warning 
signs of DCI. The diver became concerned about 'tingling' and 
after effects from his dive. The diver was taken by ambulance 
from the hospital to a hyperbaric unit. His condition was 
unknown. 
June 2013 13/151 
A diver had completed a diving holiday comprising eight dives 
over five days. None were over 30m and all were no stop dives. 
Two days after the end of the holiday, the diver was doing a 
circuit training class when he experienced some visual 
disturbance, including blind spots, and he called a divers' 
emergency helpline. Within an hour the symptoms had gone but 
the diver attended hospital. Although the symptoms had 
disappeared and nothing wrong was found with his eyes, on the 
advice of a hyperbaric consultant, the diver received two 
sessions of precautionary recompression treatment. 
June 2013 13/263 
MRCC Aberdeen were advised by ARCC that R131 was 
evacuating a diver suffering DCI, to ARI.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2013 13/111 
A dive boat skipper called the Coastguard to report that a diver 
had come ashore after conducting a wreck dive and was now 
showing signs of DCI.. The dive was to 30m and the diver had 
experienced a 'sticky' ear at 28m which cleared. The dive was for 
47 min including a 7 min of safety stop.  Advice from a dive 
doctor recommended immediate evacuation. The dive boat put 
back out to sea and a Coastguard rescue helicopter was 
scrambled. The diver was winched aboard, flown to a landing 
site and transferred by ambulance to a recompression chamber. 
The diver received treatment for vestibular DCI and bad 
neurological symptoms and further recompression treatment was 
planned. (Coastguard report). 
June 2013 13/264 
Humber MRCC received a call from a dive boat reporting they 
had a diver onboard suffering from symptoms of DCI. He was 
transferred ashore to be taken to the hyperbaric unit by 
ambulance for assessment.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/265 
Humber MRCC were contacted by a dive boat reported having a 
diver onboard who was suffering from signs & symptoms of a 
skin DCI following her dive. She was transferred to a hyperbaric 
chamber by rescue helicopter R-125.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/266 
Stornoway MRCC received a request for medical advice, this 
was provided to a dive boat who reported two divers onboard 
suffering from suspected DCI. Oban lifeboat met the dive boat 
and transferred the divers for onward transport to a hyperbaric 
chamber for assessment and treatment.  (Coastguard & RNLI 
reports). 
July 2013 13/113 
A charter dive boat issued a 'Pan Pan' call on VHF Ch 16 
reporting they had a diver onboard suffering with a possible DCI. 
The Coastguard tasked a rescue helicopter to evacuate the diver 
to a landing site where he was transported by ambulance to a 
recompression chamber. The diver, having done a previous dive 
to 10m for 60 min, was diving on a wreck in 28m, on air with two 
buddies. One was using a less conservative way of calculating 
decompression times (using a watch and not planning the dive 
using tables) and the other buddy was using nitrox but with his 
computer set to air. The diver ended up going into 
decompression because the buddy using the watch kept straying 
away and the diver and remaining buddy losing sight of him. 
When they started the ascent the diver's computer indicated that 
it would take 7 min to complete the ascent. The diver stopped at 
6m to complete a safety stop but his weightbelt slipped to the 
side which made him panic and he lost buoyancy control and 
ascended to the surface. On the dive boat the diver was given 
first aid oxygen before the helicopter evacuation to a 
recompression chamber for treatment. (Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/156 
A diver had completed a dive using nitrox 36. Following a 
surface interval, a second dive was carried out to 21m using air. 
During the dive whilst monitoring no stop times, the diver was 
surprised at how long they were able to stay down. It was only 
after 30 to 35 min that the diver realised the mix was still set to 
nitrox 36 on his computer and he was probably well into 
decompression stop requirements. The diver ascended as fast 
as he safely could and completed 7 min at 6m in an attempt to 
make up for the missed stops. On the drive home the diver felt a 
slight 'tightness' in his ring finger and although conscious that 
this may have been dive related, was not overly concerned as it 
was not getting any worse and there were no other obvious 
symptoms. The diver also admits to being embarrassed at his 
own stupidity in not checking his computer so did not mention 
this to anyone. In the early hours of the following morning the 
diver noticed his finger was still feeling 'tight' and contacted a 
hyperbaric chamber. The diver attended the facility and was 
diagnosed with DCI and received recompression treatment after 
which he felt fine and had no subsequent side effects. 
July 2013 13/188 
A diver had carried out two nitrox dives, the first to 19m for 50 
min with a 3 min stop at 6m and the second to 30m for 35 min 
with a 5 min stop at 6m. After surfacing from the second dive and 
back in the boat the diver's right arm began to 'throb'. The diver 
received recompression treatment for mild muscle DCI and was 
advised not to dive for two weeks. 
July 2013 13/269 
Shetland Coastguard received a report that a diver had self 
referred to the local hyperbaric chamber, no further details held.  
(Coastguard report). 
 

   NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
 
16        ©BSAC - 2013 
July 2013 13/130 
A group of divers had completed a week's diving in the 30 to 
50m range with two dives a day. On Friday, the last day after the 
final dive to 45m, the group had lunch, offloaded equipment from 
the dive boat and travelled to their departure ferry port where 
they loaded the equipment into a container. At the ferry terminal, 
one of the divers complained of feeling unwell, was unsteady on 
his feet and had visual disturbances. He returned to the dive 
boat with another member of the group where he was assessed 
and thought to be suffering from DCI. Evacuation was arranged 
and he was taken by ambulance to a helipad and then by 
helicopter to a hyperbaric facility where he was subsequently 
recompressed. The remaining divers had boarded the ferry to 
travel home. Subsequently two other divers in the group were 
recompressed as reported in incidents 13/220 & 13/221. All three 
divers had used open circuit equipment using nitrox with two of 
them using higher mixes for decompression. 
July 2013 13/272 
Solent MRCC were contacted by a dive boat reporting a diver 
onboard having missed stops and suffering symptoms of DCI. 
The diver was transferred to St Richards hospital by R-104.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/154 
A diver had completed three dives on the Saturday of a diving 
weekend and one on the Sunday. The diver had a fast ascent on 
the second dive on the Saturday but had descended back down 
to 3m to wait for his dive computer to clear. The Sunday dive 
went to plan but the buddy's computer showed a longer 
decompression stop time to that of the diver's adding 7 min to 
their decompression stop. After completion of the dive, the diver 
felt a little unwell but put this down to being out in the sun and 
having experienced similar symptoms in the weeks before. The 
following day the diver went to his doctor who felt it was vertigo, 
from the symptoms described. Two days later the diver 
contacted a hyperbaric chamber and they arranged for a local 
chamber to contact the diver. The diver received recompression 
treatment that evening for DCI. 
July 2013 13/220 
A group of divers had completed a week's diving in the 30 to 
50m range with two dives a day. On Friday, the last day after the 
final dive to 45m, the group had lunch, offloaded equipment from 
the dive boat and travelled to their departure ferry port where 
they loaded the equipment into a container. At the ferry terminal, 
one of the divers complained of feeling unwell, as reported in 
Incident No. 13/130. The remaining divers had boarded the ferry 
to travel home. The following day, Saturday, another diver in the 
group decided to seek medical advice as he was suffering from 
chest pain, joint pain and a rash. He was taken by ambulance to 
a hyperbaric unit where he was recompressed. It subsequently 
emerged that he had been feeling the symptoms since the 
Thursday but had not mentioned his worries to anyone. A 
number of days later another diver in the group was 
recompressed as reported in Incident 13/221. All three divers 
had used open circuit equipment using nitrox with two of them 
using higher mixes for decompression. 
July 2013 13/121 
A dive boat issued a 'Pan Pan' call after two divers made a rapid 
ascent from 26m on a drift dive. The Coastguard took advice 
from a dive doctor and tasked a Coastguard rescue helicopter 
which arrived quickly on the scene. The two divers were 
assessed then airlifted to shore and taken by ambulance to a 
recompression chamber for treatment. During treatment one of 
the pair reported that on completion of the dive he deployed his 
DSMB causing the reel to snag. As the reel was attached to the 
diver by a bungee cord it caused a fast ascent to the surface as 
he was unable to cut it. The buddy reported seeing the diver 
become entangled with the DSMB and get dragged to the 
surface but was unable to maintain contact with him and to 
complete his decompression stops. (Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/221 
A group of divers had completed a week's diving in the 30 to 
50m range with two dives a day. On Friday, the last day after the 
final dive to 45m, the group had lunch, offloaded equipment from 
the dive boat and travelled to their departure ferry port where 
they loaded the equipment into a container. Two divers from the 
group suffered DCI as reported in Incidents 13/130 & 13/220. 
After several days of discussion about the two divers who had 
suffered DCI, another diver from the group began to suspect that 
he also had symptoms of DCI. He was the buddy of the diver 
who had been airlifted to a hyperbaric chamber in Incident 
13/130 and had dived with him throughout the week. The buddy 
felt heavy and tired with some occasional 'pins and needles'. On 
the Tuesday, four days after diving had finished, he telephoned a 
recompression chamber and was advised to attend. He was 
assessed and although the symptoms were borderline, the diver 
was recompressed. All three divers had used open circuit 
equipment using nitrox with two of them using higher mixes for 
decompression. 
July 2013 13/275 
Solent MRCC were contacted by a dive boat stating they had a 
diver onboard showing signs and symptoms of DCI.  The boat 
returned to harbour and the diver was taken to hospital by 
ambulance for assessment.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/277 
Holyhead MRCC received a report of a diver showing signs and 
symptoms of DCI following a rapid ascent and missing 
decompression stops. He was transferred to a hyperbaric 
chamber by rescue helicopter R-122.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/278 
Shetland MRCC coordinated the transfer of a diver to hyperbaric 
chamber for assessment, no further details held.  (Coastguard 
report). 
July 2013 13/132 
A dive boat reported a diver showing signs of DCI. A Coastguard 
helicopter was tasked to pick up the diver. Meanwhile another 
diver onboard also showed signs of DCI. Both divers were 
airlifted to shore where a Coastguard  team, ambulance and dive 
doctor were waiting to transfer the divers to a recompression 
facility. A report from the second diver, whilst receiving 
recompression treatment, was that they had surfaced from a 'text 
book' dive to find another diver had made a rapid ascent from 
20m, had been put on oxygen and was lying down. As the 
Coastguard had been called the divers on the boat were 
requested to move all the equipment to allow room for the winch 
man. The second diver helped shift cylinders and other gear then 
sat down to wait. Gradually pain started across the diver's chest, 
into the left shoulder, arm and the abdomen and, when a visual 
migraine started, the diver lost peripheral vision. The diver 
received recompression treatment. The dive profile showed a 
first dive to 13m for 45 min and a second dive to 30m for 40 min. 
(Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/136 
A dive boat reported a diver showing signs of DCI following a 
rapid ascent from 25m. The diver was put on oxygen. Another 
diver on the boat had also shown signs of DCI. Both divers were 
airlifted to shore where a Coastguard team, ambulance and dive 
doctor were waiting to transfer the divers to a recompression 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   17 
facility. As the diver who had made the fast ascent was not 
forthcoming with any information at the recompression facility 
and also refused treatment, it became necessary for this diver to 
be sedated. It then became clear that the diver had not dived for 
six years. His first dive had been to 13m for 45 min followed by 
the second dive to 25m for 25 min. (Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/140 
A trimix diver was completing his fourth dive of a diving 
weekend, one dive on the Friday, two on the Saturday and one 
on the Sunday. On the fourth dive he noticed that his drysuit felt 
very tight around his upper right arm. He tried to move the suit 
around to loosen the fit but this did not work. The diver 
remembers thinking that he might get a bruise from it. The dive 
continued and, as with the other dives over the weekend, was 
conducted to plan. Around two hours after surfacing the diver 
noticed there was an oval shaped red mark on the inside of his 
right elbow. The mark itched a little and his right triceps muscle 
was a little painful. The diver decided to self administer oxygen 
and drink water. After an hour the mark had completely 
disappeared and the itching stopped but there was still a slight 
pain. The diver contacted a hyperbaric chamber who advised 
that he should attend if the pain got worse. The following 
morning the pain worsened so the diver went to the chamber and 
received recompression treatment but the pain did not improve 
at all. The doctor advised that there was no residual DCI and that 
the pain was probably as a result of bruising and/or a burst blood 
vessel caused by the drysuit squeeze and/or having knocked the 
triceps. The diver advised the doctor he had been boat diving for 
three days and had probably knocked his triceps on many things. 
The doctor suspected that this was the cause of the residual 
pain. 
July 2013 13/134 
Following two uneventful boat dives to 10m and 11m and 
approximately one hour after surfacing, a diver complained of 
'pins and needles' in her hands and forearms. A hyperbaric 
chamber was contacted and, on advice from the duty doctor, a 
simple neurological examination was carried out. The doctor 
asked that the diver's arms be warmed as it was possible cold 
was causing the symptoms. However, there was no change and 
the diver was put on oxygen which gave immediate relief. The 
diver went to the chamber and the symptoms were still present 
on arrival. The diver was recompressed and made a full 
recovery. However, getting DCI with normal profiles following two 
shallow dives, the diver was advised never to dive again as there 
was an underlying issue. 
July 2013 13/281 
Belfast MRCC received a call from Aberdeen hospital reporting a 
diver suffering from DCI in Arran hospital and requiring transfer 
to the decompression chamber in Millport, Cumbrae. The patient 
was transferred by R-177 and HLS manned at both Broddick and 
Millport by Arran and Cumbrae Coastguard Rescue Teams.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/118 
A rebreather diver missed decompression stops and, back on 
the dive boat, was put on first aid oxygen. Following medical 
advice, a Coastguard helicopter airlifted the diver to shore where 
a dive doctor was waiting along with an ambulance and 
Coastguards. The diver was recompressed and during treatment 
reported that she had felt anxious on the dive at around 8-10m 
and had tried to calm herself. She had recently reconfigured her 
equipment and weighting and although her trim felt different she 
believed that the incident was due to anxiety. (Coastguard 
report). 
 
July 2013 13/282 
Solent MRCC were alerted by a dive boat alongside in harbour, 
reporting a diver onboard who was displaying signs & symptoms 
of DCI following a normal dive profile. The diver was airlifted to 
hospital for assessment.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/285 
Portland MRCC tasked Poole Coastguards to assist in preparing 
an HLS at Poole as there were travellers on the pad with an air 
ambulance inbound with a diver. Poole were there already 
checking the status of the site so they simply remained. The 
diver was recovered and was treated in the Poole recompression 
chamber.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/139 
The Coastguard received an emergency call that a diver had 
suspected DCI. The dive boat was returning to harbour and a 
rescue team and ambulance were tasked to meet the diver. The 
diver was put on oxygen and transferred to hospital where a 
helicopter completed the transfer to a recompression chamber. 
The condition of the diver was reported as improving. (Media 
report). 
August 2013 13/155 
The Coastguard received an emergency call regarding a diver 
following a dive boat's return to harbour. An ambulance was 
called to the scene and the diver put on oxygen. The ambulance 
was escorted by Coastguard to a helipad where the diver was 
airlifted to a recompression chamber. The condition of the diver 
was reported as improving. (Media report). 
August 2013 13/287 
Stornoway MRCC received medical advice from Aberdeen Royal 
Infirmary, for an injured diver (female) with a suspected skin DCI, 
2 miles South of Tobermory, the vessel transported the diver to 
Oban to attend the Lorne & Islands Hospital.  (Coastguard 
report). 
August 2013 13/158 
Humber MRCC received a call on VHF CH16 from a dive RHIB; 
they had a diver onboard suffering DCI. Tynemouth ALB was 
diverted to assist from exercise whilst contact was made with the 
Diving Disease Research Centre. R-131 evacuated the diver and 
his buddy to Castle Hill Hospital, Hull, where Hull CRT and 
Yorkshire Ambulance Service were waiting and both casualties 
were taken to Hull Hyperbaric Chamber.   (Coastguard & RNLI 
reports). 
August 2013 13/167 
Portland MRCC tasked Coastguard helicopter rescue R-104 
from Lee on Solent to meet Weymouth RNLI lifeboat who had 
recovered a diver from West Bay who was showing symptoms of 
DCI following a rapid ascent from a dive from a local charter 
boat. The diver was airlifted to Poole HLS to be met by an 
ambulance, dive doctor and Poole CRT, and then transferred to 
the recompression chamber for treatment.  (Coastguard & RNLI 
reports). 
August 2013 13/160 
Portland MRCC received a call from Southwest Ambulance via 
the ARCCK, Coastguard helicopter R-106 from Portland was 
scrambled to Chepstow, Monmouthshire, to recover three divers 
who were showing symptoms of DCI following a dive in a quarry. 
The divers were airlifted to Poole HLS to be met by an 
ambulance, dive doctor and Poole CRT, and then transferred to 
the recompression chamber for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 

   NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
 
18        ©BSAC - 2013 
August 2013 13/293 
Aberdeen MRCC was contacted by a dive boat, reporting a diver 
onboard who had missed stops and was showing signs of DCI. A 
dive doctor provided medical advice and seeing that the boat 
was near to harbour they returned and the diver was transferred 
to hospital by ambulance for monitoring and assessment, on the 
advice of the doctor.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2013 13/162 
A trimix diver was carrying out decompression on oxygen at 6m 
following a dive to 51m when he noticed a mild ache in his left 
shoulder. After 22 min the pain was still there so the diver 
extended the stop by 6 min back on his dive gas and a further 6 
min on oxygen. The pain went away so the diver and buddy 
started to ascend. The pain came back in both shoulders at 3m 
and remained when he surfaced. He got back into the dive boat, 
which had a lift, sat down and within a minute felt lightheaded. 
The diver woke up a minute later having suffered a seizure and 
still with pain in both shoulders and elbows. He was put on 
oxygen, the Coastguard contacted and the diver was airlifted to a 
recompression chamber. (Coastguard report). 
August 2013 13/164 
Following a wreck dive to 30m a diver reported they had been 
incorrectly weighted and missed a 3 min safety stop after 
dropping their weightbelt. The buddy reported the diver had 
problems whilst ascending to do the safety stop and this was not 
completed correctly. Back on the boat the diver showed signs of 
DCI so the Coastguard was called and both divers were airlifted 
to a recompression chamber and received treatment. The 
Coastguard expressed concern that the diver, who was also an 
instructor, was experienced in diving overseas but that this was 
only his fourth UK sea dive and the buddy was doing their first 
sea dive of the year. (Coastguard report). 
August 2013 13/296 
Portland Coastguard tasked Coastguard helicopter R-106 to a 
dive vessel, after the skipper called on VHF reporting a 35 year-
old diver showing symptoms of DCI, following a dive off the east 
side of Portland. R-106 flew the casualty and his dive buddy to 
the landing site at Poole, where they were met by Poole 
Coastguards and a dive doctor, and from where a South West 
Ambulance conveyed both men to the nearby hyperbaric 
recompression chamber for immediate treatment.  (Coastguard 
report). 
August 2013 13/186 
A diver on a diving expedition had completed three dives on the 
first day of the trip. On the second day the first dive was to 26m 
for 42 min with a 3 min safety stop. After a surface interval of 
nearly three hours, the second dive was to 41m for 62 min with 8 
min of decompression including a 3 min safety stop. Arriving 
back at his accommodation about an hour and ten minutes after 
surfacing, the diver bent over to pick up his bags and found his 
abdomen felt tender. On examination a rash had appeared on 
his abdomen and he started to have visual disturbances with 
blurring/tired eyes. He alerted the expedition leader who thought 
the rash was a possible skin DCI. The rash was monitored and it 
spread to the bottom of the diver's ribcage and the top of his 
arms and shoulders. It was decided the diver needed to have 
oxygen while medical assistance was sought. Another diver's 
rebreather unit was used to supply oxygen at around 80%. 
Within half an hour the diver and his buddy were evacuated by 
lifeboat and now on first aid oxygen, the diver experienced a 
slightly 'dead' feeling in his right leg and 'tingling' in his big toe. 
The divers were transferred to another lifeboat with a diving 
doctor onboard who recommended hyperbaric treatment for the 
diver and arrangements were made to transfer both the divers by 
ambulance to a hyperbaric chamber when the lifeboat reached 
port. The buddy was checked throughout the journey and 
showed no symptoms of DCI. At the chamber the diver was 
further assessed and confirmed with DCI and given 
recompression treatment. All symptoms resolved and the diver 
was transferred to hospital for overnight observation and 
discharged the following day with the advice not to dive for four 
weeks and to have a PFO test. 
August 2013 13/297 
MRCC Shetland was made aware of a diver suffering symptoms 
of DCI which was reported two days after the diver had last 
dived. The diver was transferred by ambulance to a hyperbaric 
chamber for assessment.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2013 13/172 
A diver had dived to a 30m wreck and found himself getting more 
buoyant at the bottom. He found that his BCD inflator valve was 
stuck open so disconnected it and continued the dive on his 
drysuit. After 14 min and with his air down to 70 bar he signalled 
to his two buddies that he was going up and deployed his DSMB 
at 28m. He had difficulty controlling the ascent and was reported 
to have held onto a jammed DSMB reel causing a rapid ascent. 
On the surface he was recovered to a dive boat and given 
oxygen. A 'Mayday' call was made to the Coastguard who 
immediately deployed a rescue helicopter. The diver was airlifted 
to a hyperbaric unit where he received recompression treatment. 
(Coastguard report). 
August 2013 13/173 
A Coastguard rescue helicopter was tasked to a charter dive 
boat that had called to report they had a diver onboard who had 
suffered a rapid ascent and was showing signs of DCI. The diver 
was evacuated to a recompression chamber for treatment. It was 
reported that this was the diver's first UK sea dive and the 
second time attempting DSMB deployment. The diver and her 
buddy came up to 20m where the diver started to deploy her 
DSMB but lost control of buoyancy and ascended to 10m. 
Although spending a few minutes at 10m sorting out the DSMB 
the diver, possibly under-weighted, ascended straight to the 
surface missing a safety stop. The buddy deployed her own 
DSMB and surfaced shortly afterwards .On the boat the diver got 
cramps in her left arm and leg, felt unwell and was given oxygen. 
The symptoms got worse with cramps in all limbs and loss of 
feeling in lower arms and hands. Following recompression 
treatment the diver was symptom-free. (Coastguard report). 
September 2013 13/189 
A diver had completed a relaxed dive to 24m. Thirty minutes 
after surfacing the diver noticed blurring in his right eye and 
'buzzing' in his right ear whilst removing equipment from the dive 
boat. His first thought was that it was side effects from 
medication taken for indigestion. He informed the coxswain of 
the dive boat who did some checks and put the diver on oxygen 
and called the Coastguard who advised calling an ambulance. 
The diver's vision returned to normal but the 'buzzing' in his ear 
remained. The ambulance arrived and the medics decided to 
keep the diver on oxygen and take him to hospital. After being 
assessed the diver received recompression treatment and the 
'buzzing' in his ear stopped after two hours. With no other 
symptoms present the diver was discharged but told to come 
back the following morning for another session of recompression 
treatment. The diver was advised not to dive for two weeks. 
Eight days later and not having taken any medication, the diver 
had a short episode of distorted and blurred vision together with 
a headache similar to that which he had experienced after the 
dive. Speaking with the hyperbaric unit they told him that it is 
very rare for symptoms to suddenly reappear after a week and 
advised the diver to go to hospital for a check up. After some 
hospital tests it was concluded that the diver had experienced a 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   19 
'migraine with aura'. A doctor, who read all the hyperbaric 
reports, felt that the distorted vision experienced after the dive 
was this type of migraine triggered by offloading the boat, which 
was when the eye blurring started, and the 'buzzing' in the ear 
may have been caused by equalising too hard. The inside of the 
diver's ear was found to be inflamed. 
September 2013 13/192 
After an uneventful dive to 20m, a buddy pair ascended to 6m to 
complete a safety stop. One of the divers indicated that his semi 
drysuit was a bit tight and he was having difficulty breathing. 
After 3 min they made their way to the surface and exited the 
water. After the dive debrief the diver, who had difficulty 
breathing on the safety stop, said he felt giddy and unbalanced. 
However, after a three hour surface interval he felt well enough 
to do a shallow second dive to 7m for 36 min. All went well but 
he was still feeling slightly giddy. Thirty-six hours later the diver 
was still feeling the same so he contacted a diving doctor who 
arranged attendance at a hyperbaric unit. The diver received 
recompression treatment and made a full recovery. 
 
 
 
September 2013 13/303 
Shetland MRCC was made aware of a diver ashore reporting 
having symptoms of DCI. Eyemouth CRT and an ambulance 
were sent to their assistance and they were airlifted by rescue 
helicopter R131 to a hyperbaric chamber for treatment at 
Aberdeen Royal Infirmary. Aberdeen CRT and the ambulance 
service assisted with transfer to the chamber when the helicopter 
landed in Aberdeen.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2013 13/302 
Shetland MRCC was contacted by a dive boat, who reported a 
diver onboard possibly suffering from signs and symptoms of 
DCI.  Medical advice was provided by a dive doctor and they 
recommended transfer to a hyperbaric chamber for assessment.  
(Coastguard report). 
September 2013 13/310 
Stornoway MRCC was contacted by a dive boat reporting having 
a diver onboard with signs of a skin DCI. Medical advice 
provided by a dive doctor was to take the diver to hospital as 
soon as possible. Tobermory ALB was tasked to proceed to 
meet the boat. They then transferred the diver to Oban ALB 
which returned the diver ashore to be taken to Lorne & Isles 
hospital by ambulance for assessment.  (Coastguard report). 
 

   NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
 
20        ©BSAC - 2013 
Injury / Illness 
 
October 2012 13/002 
A diver was carrying two cylinders, one in each hand, down a 
wooden gangway to load onto a dive boat when he slipped 
backwards on the damp surface. During the fall the diver injured 
his knee and was in considerable pain and so an ambulance was 
called and diving cancelled for the day. The diver was 
transported to hospital by ambulance where he was found to 
have ruptured four tendons in his knee and had an operation to 
reattach the tendons. The diver was due to be immobilised for a 
total of twelve weeks. Discussions with a charter boat skipper 
moored at the same location indicated that at least four of his 
customers had suffered similar slips on the walkway during the 
same year. The owners had been informed but no remedial 
action had been taken. 
October 2012 13/231 
Whilst involved in diving activities a male diver became unwell 
onboard a dive support vessel near to Seahouses harbour. The 
crew on the vessel called the ambulance service who 
subsequently informed MRCC Humber. The male was taken to 
hospital by ambulance after ascertaining that the illness was not 
dive related. Seahouses Coastguard attended and gave safety 
advice.  (Coastguard report). 
November 2012 13/010 
A student on a training course was conducting a controlled 
buoyant lift training exercise at a maximum depth of 6m when he 
complained of ear problems and appeared to have a little blood 
in his mask. The dive was aborted after a total dive time of 14 
min and the student went for medical treatment. He was 
diagnosed with inflamed ears and advised not to dive again for 
twenty-eight days. 
November 2012 13/009 
An experienced diver was swimming breath-hold lengths during 
a club pool session. He was wearing a diving mask but no other 
diving equipment. He completed a length in the deep end and 
was seen to put his head underwater. Other swimmers checked 
he was alright and got a response but it became evident he was 
no longer responding as he began to sink lower and face down 
in the water. One member swam underneath him and looked into 
his mask and saw a small amount of blood and no sign of 
consciousness. He recovered him to the surface, took him to the 
poolside and assisted in recovering the unconscious swimmer 
from the water. First aid checks were conducted and on opening 
the diver's airway he responded and commenced breathing 
again. Sports centre staff were alerted and a paramedic arrived 
within five to ten minutes.  The swimmer was transported to 
hospital and kept overnight for observation before being 
discharged the following day. The swimmer was believed to have 
been underwater for no more than two minutes. 
January 2013 13/025 
A diver appeared to be hypothermic following a dive. Blankets 
were given and the diver was put into warm clothing and given a 
warm drink. It was reported that the diver was not fully fit prior to 
turning up for the dive, possibly due to an infection, her condition 
was exacerbated by anxiety and lack of food.  No emergency 
services were called. 
January 2013 13/026 
Thirty minutes after completing a dive to 35m a diver 
experienced wavy, shimmering visual disturbance in both eyes 
but eye co-ordination and reaction to light were fine. The diver  
 
had no known health problems nor suffered migraines in the 
past. Oxygen was administered and the disturbance appeared 
resolved. 
February 2013 13/027 
On a training course a diver was ascending from a 29m dive 
when, at 20m, the diver felt a phlegmy, tight chest with gurgling 
inside and he started to struggle to breathe. The diver ascended 
within computer ascent rate until the last 5m. On the surface the 
diver was a grey/blue colour but normal colour returned when put 
on oxygen. The diver was coherent and responsive throughout 
and had no known health problems apart from a cold a few 
weeks earlier which he felt the symptoms may be returning. The 
diver was checked by a doctor and advised that he had a viral 
chest infection. 
February 2013 13/028 
Following a dive, alarm was raised when a diver was seen sitting 
on a wall and complained of feeling lightheaded, which 
apparently had happened before. The diver was very thin, 
suffered with cold, over-exertion and fainting. Oxygen was 
administered and advice offered. 
February 2013 13/237 
Aberdeen MRCC received a call from the duty dive doctor at ARI 
advising of an ill diver onboard a dive boat in Largo Bay. After 
speaking to the vessel direct, and in consultation with the doctor, 
the casualty was met by ambulance at Methil Docks and 
conveyed to Aberdeen Royal Infirmary.  (Coastguard report). 
March 2013 13/037 
On the first dive of the day, two divers made a slow descent to 
the bottom spending about 2 min sorting out buoyancy and 
clearing ears. Having completed their descent and about to 
begin the exploratory part of their dive, the dive leader noticed 
his buddy had started swimming in circles so went to see what 
was wrong. The buddy looked blank but smiling, gave the 'up' 
signal and grabbed his BCD. The dive leader did a quick check 
for panic or if a rapid ascent was needed but, with no apparent 
urgency, he conducted a controlled buoyant lift to the surface. 
On the surface the diver established the buddy had felt dizzy 
underwater and didn't know where she was. The buddy was still 
disoriented but communicative and the dive leader began to tow 
her to shore but after a couple of minutes she had regained 
enough composure to surface swim to the exit point. A doctor 
confirmed that the buddy had suffered a burst ear drum. 
April 2013 13/054 
A group of six divers (two students, three divers & one instructor) 
were at a dive site.  Following their first dive they saw a group of 
four divers, which included the casualty, arrive and kit up.  They 
watched the casualty and his buddy enter the water, descend 
and swim out some distance underwater.  They noticed the 
divers ascend; the casualty seemed to be distressed and unable 
to stay afloat.  The buddy struggled to keep the casualty afloat 
and was trying to tow the casualty back.  The casualty fell 
unconscious in the water and divers began to assist in the 
rescue by swimming to them and giving rescue breaths.  They 
got the casualty out of the water and began CPR and oxygen 
administration; the casualty began breathing and recovered 
consciousness.  They monitored the casualty until the 
emergency services arrived.  He was taken to hospital and was 
reported to be making a recovery. 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   21 
April 2013 13/326 
Whilst surfacing with a student, the casualty experienced a slight 
rapid ascent between 12m and 6m but he slowed to a normal 
ascent from 6m to the surface. They completed some surface 
skills and then moved to exit the water.  Before they were able to 
exit the water the casualty experienced some pain in his chest 
area and, concerned, he informed the dive team of his 
symptoms.  They left the water, removed his kit and 
administered oxygen.  The emergency services were called and 
the casualty was transported to hospital for precautionary tests.  
He was discharged that evening with no further symptoms. 
May 2013 13/095 
After surfacing a diver approached the lift at the stern of the dive 
boat but was unable to stand on the platform as it was too low. 
The skipper of the boat started to raise the lift but as the diver's 
feet hit the platform she was pushed forward by the pressure of 
water behind her and put out her hands to avoid hitting the stern. 
At this point both the diver's hands became trapped in the lift 
mechanism and although able to free one hand the other 
remained trapped in the mechanism which was still operating. 
The lift was switched off and the skipper, the diver's buddy and 
other divers on the boat used tools to open the metal and 
release the diver's hand. Back in the boat two of the divers took 
control, one was a nurse and the other a paramedic, whilst the 
skipper radioed ahead to arrange for an ambulance at the 
harbour. The diver was taken to hospital and treated for a very 
deep laceration to her left index finger. 
May 2013 13/065 
A diver felt a bit unwell before a dive but, having sat out of the 
afternoon dive the day before, was keen to go diving. The dive 
went without incident apart from the diver's rebreather unit 
feeling uncomfortable and needing to shift it on his back whilst 
reeling in a distance line into the tide back to the shotline. Back 
on the boat the diver felt unwell, possibly seasick, and felt 
discomfort in his shoulder area. He informed his buddy and the 
dive manager. His dive was to 26m for 35 min including a 3 min 
stop.  A lifeboat was sent to the scene and evacuated the diver 
and his buddy to the shore. A waiting ambulance took the divers 
to a recompression chamber for medical advice. The diver 
visited an osteopath three days later and inflammation in the 
intercostal muscles between the shoulder blade and the spine 
was diagnosed. 
May 2013 13/080 
A dive RHIB was being towed from a slipway to a car park. Four 
people were riding in the RHIB while it was being towed. On 
route the boat bounced off the trailer throwing the occupants into 
the road with the RHIB landing on one of them who suffered 
chest and shoulder injuries. An ambulance was called and the 
injured diver was assessed by paramedics before being 
transferred to hospital by air ambulance. (Coastguard report). 
June 2013 13/331 
The casualty was completing his fourth open water training dive 
and the dive went as planned.  When it was time to ascend the 
casualty had difficulty controlling the ascent, so the instructor 
assisted and controlled the ascent to the safety stop.  It was 
decided to conduct the dive again as the ascent had not been 
mastered.  The casualty completed the next dive and then they 
attempted the ascent skill.  During the ascent the casualty was 
unable to correctly vent air from his drysuit and finned to go up.  
As the casualty needed help to ascend correctly the instructor 
took him back down to try another time.  During the next attempt 
the casualty became agitated and wasn't looking comfortable, so 
they ended the dive.  At the surface they established the 
casualty's buoyancy and he was towed to the shore.  He was out  
 
of breath and needed help to exit the water.  Later on he 
coughed small amounts of blood and so oxygen was 
administered and the emergency services were called.  The 
casualty was admitted to hospital overnight and advised that it 
may have been a chest infection. 
July 2013 13/332 
Before making a giant stride entry into confined water a student 
seemed unsure about standing close to the water's edge.  The 
water of the pool came right to the top of the edge of the pool 
and so a high stride was needed to clear the water with her fins. 
The instructor tried to help the student by guiding her foot above 
the water but the student lost her balance and fell on her side. 
She suffered bruising on her leg. 
July 2013 13/122 
Portland MRCC were contacted by a dive vessel, returning to 
Portland Harbour, reporting that a diver was experiencing 
abdominal problems. Following advice for the recompression 
chamber at Poole, he was airlifted to Poole to be examined by a 
specialist dive doctor. He was met by Poole Coastguards and 
South Western ambulance.  At first it was thought the diver could 
have DCI but it was later believed not to be the case and the 
Coastguard helicopter airlifted the diver to hospital. 
July 2013 13/274 
Shetland MRCC received a call from a dive boat, reporting a 
diver onboard who was having a suspected heart attack and the 
boat still had divers in the water. The boat returned ashore for 
the diver to be taken to hospital by ambulance.  (Coastguard 
report). 
July 2013 13/137 
Following a dive and back in the dive RHIB a diver had a bubble-
like swelling under his right eye. He reported no pain or loss of 
vision and displayed no signs of DCI but stated that he had 
experienced difficulty with his right ear not clearing during the 
ascent but on the safety stop it had suddenly cleared. The RHIB 
returned to shore, a hyperbaric chamber was contacted and they 
requested the diver attend. On arrival the diver was assessed by 
the duty doctor and diagnosed with a subcutaneous orbital 
emphysema. No recompression treatment was required but the 
diver is awaiting further medical consultation and, as a 
precautionary measure, was told not to dive for a month. 
July 2013 13/280 
MRCC Brixham obtained radio medical advice from the Diving 
Diseases Research Centre duty doctor for a male diver 
experiencing breathing problems onboard a dive boat in 
Plymouth Sound after a recent dive. The diver was transported 
to Derriford hospital for assessment by the doctor.  (Coastguard 
& RNLI reports). 
July 2013 13/334 
A group of students followed their instructor down to a platform 
at a depth of 7m to make an alternate air source ascent. The 
casualty and her buddy completed the skill but it was too fast so 
they were asked to descend and try again. During the descent 
the buddy became separated from the casualty and instructor. 
The casualty couldn't equalise and so went up to the surface.  
During her second attempt to descend her ear popped but she 
continued with the dive.  She went to the doctor two days later 
and was told she had ruptured her eardrum. 
August 2013 13/152 
Portland MRCC was contacted by a dive boat, approximately 
5nm from Swanage Pier and with divers in the water, they 

   NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
 
22        ©BSAC - 2013 
reported that a diver had suffered a dislocated knee. The 
casualty was airlifted by Coastguard helicopter R-106 to Dorset 
County hospital to be met by South Western Ambulance and 
Wyke Coastguards.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2013 13/157 
Holyhead MRCC was contacted by a dive boat reporting they 
had a diver who had surfaced and been stung by a jellyfish in the 
face.  The diver was suffering a lot of pain, and had difficulty 
breathing and chest pains.  Medical advice from a dive doctor 
was for the diver to be taken to hospital first to treat the breathing 
problems. The boat returned ashore and the diver was 
transferred to hospital by ambulance.  (Coastguard & RNLI 
reports). 
August 2013 13/323 
Lifeboat launched to help diver with illness.  Person brought in.  
(RNLI report). 
August 2013 13/295 
Aberdeen MRCC received a call from a diver who was ashore in 
a harbour reported that he was feeling unwell.  As they were 
ashore they were advised to call an ambulance for transfer to a 
hyperbaric chamber, Eyemouth CRT was sent to the scene to 
locate the diver. The diver was eventually transferred by rescue 
helicopter R-131.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2013 13/176 
A ten year old snorkeler was reported to be in difficulty and 
thought to have suffered an epileptic seizure. A young man on 
the beach raced into action to help pull the snorkeler to safety. 
He dived into the sea to grab her, removed her mask and swam 
her to the side of a fishing boat. The snorkeler was recovered 
into the boat and the young man got in and wrapped towels 
around her. The Coastguard arranged a rescue helicopter to 
evacuate her to hospital. The girl was reported to be recovering 
in hospital. (Media report). 
September 2013 13/306 
Stornoway MRCC received a 999 call from a dive party ashore 
with one of them having problems. It was unclear if he was 
suffering from DCI, but he had suffered inhalation of seawater. 
The diver was receiving oxygen treatment but this had run out. 
The caller had to leave the party and go about 1 mile to obtain 
mobile phone coverage to call for help. Torridon and Oban CRT 
attended the scene and the diver was airlifted by rescue 
helicopter R- 
100 to Lorne & Isles hospital for assessment and treatment.  
(Coastguard report). 
 
 
 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   23 
Boating & Surface Incidents 
 
October 2012 13/001 
The Coastguard was called to assist a diver who had become 
stranded on rocks on an offshore island after becoming 
separated from his dive party. Two lifeboats were launched but 
the crew were unable to reach the diver who was wedged in a 
crevice. After an hour and half the diver was airlifted by a rescue 
helicopter and transferred to hospital where he was treated for 
exhaustion and exposure. 
October 2012 13/086 
A fuel blockage caused engine failure on a dive boat. Two divers 
were visible on the surface but the boat could not recover them 
due to the engine failure. A call to the Coastguard was made and 
an inshore lifeboat deployed. Before the lifeboat arrived the dive 
boat managed to pick up the divers but, as the boat's engine was 
still unreliable, the vessel was towed back to port. (Coastguard & 
RNLI reports). 
November 2012 13/233 
Information received from MRCC Clyde of a 6m RHIB, with 
seven divers onboard, broken down and drifting off Kyle of 
Lochalsh. The RHIB was towed safely into Kyle harbour by a 
fishing vessel which had been tasked by Kyle harbour master.  
(Coastguard report). 
December 2012 13/235 
Belfast Coastguard tasked Largs ILB and Largs CRT to respond 
to a dive RHIB drifting without power between Cumbrae and 
Largs. Largs ILB intercepted the casualty (2POB) and 
established a tow to a slipway near Largs sailing club. Largs 
CRT provided assistance and advice on arrival.  (Coastguard & 
RNLI reports). 
January 2013 13/022 
The Coastguard received a report that a diver was overdue from 
his dive boat which had one other person aboard. Two lifeboats, 
a helicopter, police RHIBs, and MoD and numerous dive boats 
searched and fairly quickly located the diver who was recovered 
and did not require any medical treatment. 
April 2013 13/047 
A group of divers were diving from a RHIB and had filled the fuel 
tank at the start of the weekend and used approximately half on 
the Saturday. On reaching the final dive site on the Sunday, the 
boat became swamped due to its low transom in the choppy 
conditions. Whilst the divers kitted up the coxswain slowly 
manoeuvred the boat around to clear some water. Minutes 
before the divers were ready to enter the water, the engine cut 
out and would not restart. Some divers de-kitted and bailed the 
water out but this did not rectify the situation. After a bit of 
investigation it was realised that the engine was out of fuel. 
Having drifted away from the shotline, the anchor was deployed 
and all divers de-kitted and remained in the boat. A call was 
made to a contact ashore in a marina for someone to arrange to 
bring fuel out to the boat. A passing dive RHIB was waved down 
and they agreed to go to the marina and try to collect some fuel. 
But, being a Sunday, no fuel stations were open so the RHIB 
returned and refuelled the stranded boat with the spare fuel they 
were carrying. The engine was restarted and the boat returned to 
the marina, the rescue RHIB following as a safety precaution. 
Following the incident, the fuel consumption was felt to be higher 
than normal but after various calculations on distance travelled, 
fuel consumption in relation to the numbers of divers, kit onboard 
and ruling out a possible leak or fuel being stolen from the boat 
overnight, the conclusion was that the boat was at full capacity 
which resulted in a higher than normal fuel consumption rate. 
The divers have put in place a boat check protocol to check fuel 
before each journey, always refuel at the start of the day and 
carry spare fuel on all diving trips. 
April 2013 13/224 
A club RHIB had encountered problems following an engine 
service and had to be returned for adjustment. A trip was 
planned to test the engine and if possible conduct a dive to 
search for a torch lost on a previous occasion. The engine test 
proved satisfactory and it was decided it was safe to conduct the 
dive. The dive was conducted in the vicinity of a wreck within a 
harbour. A shotline was deployed and the divers conducted a 
circular search for the torch. The torch was located and one diver 
went to pass the torch to the other but the silty bottom was 
disturbed and the pair became separated. One diver followed the 
distance line back to the shotline and surfaced without further 
problem. The other diver deployed a DSMB and also surfaced 
safely. On surfacing both divers discovered that the boat was not 
approaching them.  Whilst the divers had been underwater the 
RHIB engine had stopped and the RHIB had been blown 
towards the harbour wall. The coxswain had dropped the anchor 
but this did not get a solid hold until the RHIB was very close to 
the rocks of the harbour wall. The coxswain called the 
Coastguard to explain the situation. The Coastguard tasked an 
RNLI ILB to assist and a Coastguard helicopter, which was 
already in the area, flew over to assess the situation but took no 
further role. A passing fishing boat passed a towline to the RHIB 
and towed it away from the rocks allowing it to redeploy its 
anchor. The diver on the shotline managed to swim the short 
distance to the anchored RHIB. The diver on the DSMB was 
drifting and the fishing boat attempted to tow him back to the 
RHIB but aborted the attempt and recovered the diver and then 
transferred him to the lifeboat. 
May 2013 13/178 
A group of five divers were wreck diving using their 4m RHIB. 
The plan was to launch from a slipway, cross a stretch of water 
and use a beach near the wreck site as their shore base. This 
involved taking the divers and kit in two boat runs from the 
slipway to the beach, use the boat to support two waves of 
divers from the beach to dive the wreck and then return to the 
slipway using two boat runs from the beach. No VHF radios had 
been brought along so small walkie talkies were to be used to 
communicate between the boat, the slipway and the beach. The 
boat left the slipway with the first pair of divers and kit and 
deposited them on the beach. A test was carried out on the 
walkie talkies but the signal was very weak.  A check of mobile 
phones confirmed a good signal and contact was made with the 
two remaining divers on the slipway. They were collected and 
taken to the beach and diving on the wreck carried out from the 
boat in the two waves. Following the second wave of three divers 
being recovered into the boat, the coxswain decided not to drop 
them back on the beach but to head straight back to the slipway, 
drop them off and return to the beach to collect the remaining 
diver, kit and all personal bags. The boat was heavily laden and 
hit some rough water which resulted in it becoming swamped. 
The engine began to struggle and the fuel tank was now 
underwater but, despite moving it on top of the dive kit, the 
engine cut out and would not restart. At this point it was 
discovered that the walkie talkies were both on the beach with 
the lone diver along with all the personal bags containing mobile 
phones. The boat was now drifting down the coast away from the 
slipway so the oars were used, along with a diver finning from 
the stern, to get the boat to shore where there was a main road 
and assistance. The Coastguard had already been alerted, by 

 
 
  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
24  ©BSAC - 2013 
mobile phone, by the lone diver left on the beach who had 
witnessed the whole event. A lifeboat was launched to recover 
the diver and equipment from the beach before recovering the 
boat and remaining divers to the slipway. 
May 2013 13/242 
Holyhead MRCC received a call from North Wales Ambulance of 
an overdue diver at Bull Bay. Diver reported to have resurfaced, 
Cemaes Coastguard rescue team tasked to ascertain the welfare 
of the diver. Diver checked over by ambulance crew no further 
medical assistance required.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2013 13/245 
Liverpool MRCC received a call from a dive boat reporting that 
they had two overdue divers whilst diving on the wreck of the 
Dublin. Rescue helicopter 122 and Rhyl RNLI ALB where tasked. 
The vessel was given search instruction and whilst carrying out 
the search located the two divers of the surface, both were 
confirmed as unhurt and required no medical assistance.  
(Coastguard report). 
May 2013 13/082 
A dive RHIB was being run on a sea trial following a 
maintenance period. After about ten minutes the helmsman 
slowed the boat down at which point the engine stalled. Several 
unsuccessful attempts were made to restart the engine. The 
RHIB was in safe water and away from any shipping channels so 
the anchor was deployed to enable further investigation by the 
crew. No fault with the engine could be identified and the engine 
would not restart. A non-emergency call was made to the 
Coastguard and an inshore lifeboat deployed and towed the 
RHIB back to shore. 
May 2013 13/247 
999 call received expressing concern for two overdue divers in 
the Wemyss Bay (Forth) area. Further investigation conducted 
and coordination handover document prepared for incident 
transfer to MRCC Aberdeen. The first informant then reported 
that the divers had announced themselves safely ashore.  
(Coastguard report). 
May 2013 13/250 
Portland MRCC received a 'Pan Pan' urgency call on VHF radio 
from a dive boat who reported having two missing divers off 
Durlston Head. Shortly after the call was made it became 
apparent that both divers had been located by another dive boat, 
the vessel was able to confirm that both divers had been 
recovered safe and well and proceeded back to Poole harbour.  
(Coastguard report). 
May 2013 13/312 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  Others 
coped.  (RNLI report). 
May 2013 13/249 
MRCC Brixham received communications from a dive boat, with 
six POB, aground on Plymouth Breakwater after losing power. 
MOD launch Integrity responded and towed the vessel safely 
back to Mount Batten.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2013 13/248 
Shetland MRCC was contacted by a dive boat who reported two 
overdue divers in Scapa Flow, Orkney. Stromness RNLI lifeboat 
and two other dive boats were tasked to assist and proceed to 
the dive location. Shortly after the initial call, the two divers had  
 
been located safe and well on the surface about 300m from the 
dive site.  (Coastguard report). 
 
 
 
Analysis of boating & surface incidents 
0 10 20 30
Bad seamanship
Boat prob lems
Engine prob lems
Lost d ivers
  
 
 
June 2013 13/256 
Portland MRCC received a call from a dive vessel reporting that 
another vessel had picked up two divers in the sea off Lulworth 
Cove. The divers had become separated from their dive vessel, 
the assisting vessel was able to reunite the divers with their dive 
boat. On arrival back in Lulworth Cove the vessel was met by 
Lulworth Coastguard officers who gave safety advice.  
(Coastguard report). 
June 2013 13/257 
Belfast MRCC received a call on VHF CH16 from a dive boat 
which had broken down 2nm south of Kilkeel with nine POB. 
Kilkeel ILB were tasked to respond and assisted with restarting 
the vessel and escorting it up the lough to Greenore, where it 
was secured safely alongside.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2013 13/088 
Two divers became separated from their dive boat. The divers 
were picked up by another vessel and reunited with their dive 
boat. On return to shore the crew of the dive boat were given 
safety advice by Coastguard officers. (Media report). 
June 2013 13/260 
Stornoway MRCC was contacted by a dive boat with six POB 
requesting assistance as it had suffered engine failure 1 mile 
from South Shields beach. Tynemouth ILB and Sunderland CRT 
was tasked. The vessel was towed back to Cullercoats harbour.  
(Coastguard report). 
June 2013 13/109 
Portland MRCC tasked Weymouth RNLI inshore and all weather 
lifeboats, Wyke Coastguards and numerous other craft in a 
search for a diver who was missing, in thick fog, from a dive 
RHIB whilst diving in Weymouth Bay. Soon after the search 
commenced he was located safe and well on the surface, no 
medical assistance was required. Lulworth Coastguards were 
tasked but stood down. Wyke Coastguards met the RHIB on 
return to Weymouth.  The diver, who had been searching for 
scallops, had been in the water for around three hours. 
Number of incidents 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   25 
June 2013 13/262 
Swansea MRCC tasked Mumbles RNLI all weather lifeboat to a 
6.5mtr RHIB after it had suffered engine failure just off of 
Mumbles lighthouse. The vessel was safely towed back to 
Swansea marina by the lifeboat.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
June 2013 13/106 
Portland MRCC received a call from a dive boat that had engine 
problems and became separated from their divers. The skipper 
was diving with his buddy and the pair left onboard were unable 
to deal with the engine problems, and were also unable to 
provide an accurate position or use the equipment on the boat 
properly.  A nearby dive boat recovered the divers and assisted 
the boat back to harbour.  An inshore lifeboat was tasked to 
assist. (Coastguard report). 
June 2013 13/314 
Lifeboat launched to search for missing diver(s).  One person 
landed.  (RNLI report). 
July 2013 13/268 
Portland MRCC were contacted by a vessel who reported a 
sighting of two unattached divers on the surface over Peverell 
Ledges. They had become separated from their dive boat at the 
end of a drift dive. The vessel recovered the divers and returned 
them to Swanage Pier to be re-united with their parent vessel.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/315 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  Others 
coped.  (RNLI report). 
July 2013 13/116 
Solent MRCC received a call from a shore contact reporting two 
divers overdue returning from a night dive. They returned safe 
and well later than they had indicated to their shore contact.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/316 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  Resolved 
unaided.  (RNLI report). 
July 2013 13/271 
Aberdeen MRCC were alerted to a diver that was overdue 
returning from a shore dive, before units were tasked he turned 
up safe and well.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/317 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  
(RNLI report). 
July 2013 13/117 
Two dive RHIBs were on a wreck site and had deployed their 
divers down a shotline. One of the boats experienced problems 
with an engine but as the second one was working they were 
able to recover their divers. A sea fog had started to form and 
the visibility had started to close in. Efforts were made to fix the 
problem engine but this was abandoned as it became apparent 
that it was a gearbox problem. Checking with the other RHIB, 
who still had two divers underwater, it was agreed that the boat 
with the problem would start back to shore as their speed would 
be decreased with only one working engine. While heading back 
the boat heard the RHIB that had remained on site make a call to 
the Coastguard saying they had lost contact with the shot buoy 
and their divers as their GPS had failed and surface visibility had 
fallen to between 50-100m. Although using a backup GPS they 
did not have co-ordinates for the wreck. The RHIB returning to 
shore stopped and relayed the co-ordinates and the correct 
wreck name to the Coastguard who put out a 'Mayday' call to all 
vessels in the area as well as deploying lifeboats and a search 
and rescue helicopter. Two other dive boats responded with 
offers of help as the RHIB running on one engine was some 
distance from the site and could not return quickly. The two dive 
boats reached the wreck shot buoy but there were no divers 
visible. They assessed the direction of current by drifting from 
the shot buoy, then separated to steer the course of the current 
whilst keeping a sharp lookout. After about ten to fifteen minutes 
the divers were spotted approximately 1.2 nm from the shot buoy 
and the weather had started to improve with the fog beginning to 
lift. Both divers were recovered and neither had any problems. 
When they had surfaced from the dive to find their dive boat 
missing, they held onto the shotline for about twenty minutes 
until the current became too strong but this action had helped in 
reducing the distance they drifted. The divers had deployed 
DSMBs, used a whistle and a horn device but no one reporting 
hearing anything. An inshore lifeboat arrived at the shot buoy as 
the boat who recovered the divers was contacting the 
Coastguard. All boats returned safely to shore. The Coastguard 
watch manager said "that the dive boat did exactly the right thing 
by calling us as soon as it realised that it couldn't get back to the 
divers on the surface. Good communications at sea are vital in 
this situation". 
July 2013 13/318 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  
(RNLI report). 
July 2013 13/276 
Swansea MRCC tasked RAF Rescue Helicopter R-169 and 
Appledore RNLI lifeboats to an overdue diver from a dive boat off 
Lundy Island. The diver was found while taking detail, safe and 
well.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/279 
Brixham MRCC tasked Plymouth RNLI inshore lifeboat and all 
weather lifeboat, RN rescue helicopter R-193 from Culdrose, 
other dive boats and an angling boat.  All assisted in searching 
for a missing diver from a dive support vessel off Penlee, 
Plymouth. The diver surfaced safely without missing stops. Units 
stood down. 'Pan Pan' cancelled.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
July 2013 13/335 
A group of eleven people were travelling in a dive boat when it 
was swamped by heavy seas.  The boat rapidly capsized and 
started to sink, trapping people in the wheelhouse.  All were able 
to escape the sinking boat.  A lifeboat happened to be in the 
area, returning from an exercise.  The boat party were recovered 
into the lifeboat and returned safely to the shore.  (Media report). 
July 2013 13/284 
Holyhead MRCC was alerted (eventually) to two divers overdue 
from their dive.  Their dive boat had broken down and had been 
drifting for the time they had been missing. The report was not 
made to the Coastguard until they had been missing for about 2 
hours. Two lifeboats assisted in the search.  The divers were 
eventually located safe and well making for land having been 
swimming for about 2 hours and the boat was towed back to 
harbour.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
 
 
 

 
 
  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
26  ©BSAC - 2013 
 
Boating & surface incident report source analysis 
7
38
26
9
BSAC Reports (7) Coastguard (38)
RNLI (26) Media (9)
 
 
August 2013 13/150 
Following the first dive of the day, a group of divers loaded 
equipment onto a charter boat and into an attached tender (a 
small flat bottomed boat). The boat and divers set off for the next 
dive site and began lunch. They noticed that the tender had 
capsized and thrown the equipment it was carrying into the 
water. Some sank, some floated. In an attempt to rescue the 
equipment one of the divers was left on the tender which was 
cast off from the main boat to drift. The remaining divers and 
hardboat crew set off to recover drifting equipment. Some heavy 
kit such as weights and fins had sunk and were lost. Following 
recovery of as much equipment as possible, the tender was 
reattached to the charter boat which began to return to port. 
However, the tender capsized again and the additional stress 
snapped the tow line. A stronger line was attached and the boat 
and tender moved to a bay where the crew and divers righted the 
tender and reattached it to the boat. The boat and divers 
proceeded back to port and aborted the remaining week's diving. 
August 2013 13/286 
Milford Haven MRCC tasked Angle RNLI all weather lifeboat, 
Dale C Pilot vessel 'Picton', water ranger and police RIHB M33 
to assist a dive support vessel off Thorn Island (Milford Haven 
Waterways) after she broadcast a 'Pan Pan'; stating she had lost 
power and was drifting with two divers still in the water. The 
divers were safely recovered and the vessel was towed into 
Dale, Pembrokeshire.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
August 2013 13/290 
Holyhead MRCC received a call reporting that four divers were 
missing off Porth Ysgaden. Two divers were recovered by 
another vessel and two by rescue helicopter R-122.  
(Coastguard report). 
August 2013 13/319 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. 
(RNLI report). 
August 2013 13/289 
Portland MRCC was contacted by the skipper of a charter 
vessel, calling on VHF to report that his vessel had been  
 
 
swamped in Weymouth Bay and that he had suffered engine 
failure. A nearby vessel responded to a request for assistance 
and proceeded to the position. In the event, the crew of the dive 
vessel were able to restart their engine and they then returned 
safely to their mooring at Castletown in Portland Harbour.  
(Coastguard report). 
August 2013 13/321 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  (RNLI 
report). 
August 2013 13/320 
Two lifeboats launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  
(RNLI report). 
August 2013 13/322 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  Others 
coped.  (RNLI report). 
August 2013 13/291 
Falmouth MRCC received a 999 call reporting two divers to be 
on the surface and waving. Rescue R-193 was in the area for the 
local lifeboat day so they went and airlifted them and landed 
them ashore. They were being carried away by the tide and did 
not need any medical attention.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2013 13/292 
Falmouth MRCC received a call from a dive RHIB reporting loss 
of main engine. They made their own way to St Ives using an 
auxiliary engine and maintaining a communications schedule 
with MRCC Falmouth.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2013 13/294 
Portland MRCC received a report from a dive boat that one of his 
divers, on a re-breather, was approx 45min overdue after he lost 
sight of his SMB in poor visibility, he hadn't been seen by the 
other divers since they all entered the water. There was some 
uncertainty about the location of the dive boat. The visibility in 
the area was reported to have reduced since the divers entered 
the water.  Three CRTs, two lifeboats, six local vessels and a 
helicopter were tasked to carry out a search for the diver. About 
45 min after the diver was reported missing, he was located by 
one of the vessel searching and transferred to a lifeboat to be 
returned ashore. Safety advice was provided to the dive boat.  
(Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
August 2013 13/166 
A dive boat reported to the Coastguard that three divers were 
overdue from a drift dive. As the Coastguard gathered 
information the dive boat confirmed that all divers had surfaced a 
short distance away. (Media report). 
August 2013 13/299 
Humber MRCC was contacted by a dive boat who made a 999 
call reporting a missing diver while close inshore. The diver and 
his buddy had both been making their way towards the dive boat 
but as the buddy was recovered to the boat the other diver 
disappeared. The dive boat had to be steered inshore and a 
second diver waded ashore to use a passer-by's mobile phone to 
alert the Coastguard as the boat did not have a marine VHF 
radio onboard. As the lifeboat arrived at the scene the diver 
resurfaced near his boat and was recovered safe and well. 
September 2013 13/300 
Holyhead MRCC took a 999 call reporting three divers stranded 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   27 
ashore on an isolated beach following a shore dive. Treaddur 
Bay lifeboat was launched to their assistance and they were 
returned safely ashore.  (Coastguard& RNLI reports). 
September 2013 13/174 
A group of eight divers travelled to an offshore site to conduct a 
second dive of the day. Tide tables and charts had been 
consulted and it had been calculated there would be little or no 
drift on the site. As the RHIB approached the dive site they 
checked a buoy in the area to confirm that there was only a 
minimal current running. The first divers to deploy were advised 
to drift with any current but that if there was no current to head in 
a westerly direction. The first pair of divers entered the water 
using an SMB and were seen to head in a westerly direction. 
The second pair entered without using an SMB but confirmed 
they would deploy a DSMB from the seabed, which they did and 
headed in a similar direction. The third pair also deployed a 
DSMB during their dive. After the first pair surfaced one took 
over the coxing role and the remaining pair prepared to dive.  
During this time the second pair surfaced and were recovered. 
The final pair were offered an SMB but declined to take it with 
them. It was assumed they would deploy a DSMB following the 
same procedure as the earlier groups but were not explicitly 
instructed to do so. After the divers descended it became 
apparent that they were not immediately deploying a DSMB. The 
RHIB tried to follow the divers' bubbles but quickly lost sight of 
them. The third pair then surfaced about 200m away and the 
RHIB went to recover them. The RHIB then tried send a recall 
signal to the final pair by revving the boat engine three times, this 
was repeated twice in the hope it would result in a DSMB 
deployment but there was no response. The senior divers 
onboard discussed options and agreed to continue searching 
until the divers were expected to run into decompression and so 
likely to surface. When this time had passed the Coastguard was 
alerted to the situation using a 'Pan Pan' call. The Coastguard 
tasked an RNLI lifeboat and a rescue helicopter to search for the 
missing divers. Other boats in the area also responded to the call 
and joined the search. When the helicopter arrived on scene 
they quickly located the missing divers approximately one mile 
south of the boat's position and they directed the RHIB back to 
recover their divers. The divers had deployed a DSMB at the end 
of the dive but were too far away to be spotted by the RHIB. The 
lead diver subsequently admitted he had forgotten to deploy the 
DSMB earlier in the dive. 
September 2013 13/184 
Portland MRCC received a call from a local vessel reporting 
losing contact with two divers off Portland Bill. Portland Bill 
National Coastwatch Institute lookout spotted the surface marker 
buoys and reported their position to the Coastguard. The divers 
were quickly recovered by the parent vessel  (Coastguard 
report). 
September 2013 13/191 
After picking up divers the engine on a dive RHIB stopped and 
would not restart. As the dive boat was in a sheltered bay, the 
divers walked the boat onto a beach where they checked the 
engine, connections and fuel supply. After a while they got the 
engine restarted and began to make their way back around the 
bay to the slip where they had launched the boat. On route they 
were met by a local lifeboat which followed them back to the slip 
where they recovered their boat. It turned out that while trying to 
resolve the engine problem on the beach, one of the divers had 
walked around the bay which the rest of the group had thought 
was to see if there was another slipway nearby. In fact the diver 
had walked to the lifeboat station and reported the problem. 
Although having a marine radio/GMDSS onboard, the divers had 
not judged that the situation needed any assistance up to the 
point the lifeboat arrived. However they were happy to receive 
the reassurance the lifeboat crew offered. 
September 2013 13/305 
Aberdeen MRCC took a 999 call reporting a diver being washed 
onto rocks.  Macduff ILB, Portsoy and Banff CRTs investigated. 
The lifeboat recovered the diver and returned him to shore safe 
and well where he was met by Coastguards and an ambulance. 
The diver had panicked after becoming separated from his 
buddy who was safe ashore.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2013 13/307 
Brixham MRCC received a call from a dive boat with twelve POB 
that had broken down with engine problems. Torbay ALB was 
tasked to proceed, but the boat was able to get the engine 
started and return to harbour under their own power.  They were 
met by Torbay CRT who provided safety advice.  (Coastguard 
report). 
 

 
 
  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
28  ©BSAC - 2013 
Ascent Incidents 
 
October 2012 13/085 
A dive vessel operating in Lyme Bay, contacted Portland 
Coastguard requesting medical advice for a male diver who had 
reached the surface after missing 30 min of de-compression 
stops. Following advice from a specialist dive doctor, Coastguard 
helicopter rescue R-106 was tasked to winch the diver from the 
vessel and take him for further treatment at the Poole 
recompression chamber. Poole Coastguard rescue officers 
manned the helicopter landing site in Poole, South Western 
Ambulance provided an ambulance for final transport to the 
chamber.  (Coastguard report). 
October 2012 13/008 
A diver was undertaking his first open water dive in a drysuit with 
his more experienced buddy on a wreck. On entering the water 
the diver was unable to get down and was handed additional 
weights totalling 5 kg before he was able to descend. During the 
dive the pair descended to a maximum depth of 15m and the 
diver was seen to be positioned above his buddy by 2m and had 
to swim down frequently but did not appear to be improperly 
weighted. After approximately 32 min at a depth of 10m the 
buddy indicated a fish below them and in looking down the diver 
made a feet first ascent direct to the surface. His buddy 
ascended at a controlled rate but omitted a precautionary safety 
stop at 3m. On surfacing the cover boat was called over, after 
initially having difficulty starting the engine, and the pair were 
recovered.  The diver was placed on oxygen for approximately 
five minutes but he insisted he felt fine at all stages. It transpired 
that the diver had forgotten to fit his two 1 kg ankle weights and 
this had the effect of altering his posture. He was advised to 
seek further practice using his drysuit. 
December 2012 13/017 
Two buddy pairs went in as a four to do a 60 min quarry dive to a 
maximum depth of 25m. Due to rainfall increasing the water level 
the maximum depth was 27m. One of the divers had a problem 
with some water in his regulator. When his primary regulator 
flooded, the diver switched to his octopus which also flooded and 
he made an uncontrolled ascent to the surface. One of the divers 
in the group, realising one of the other buddy pair was missing, 
paired the remaining two divers with instructions to remain by the 
buoy line and he then ascended where he found the missing 
diver lying on the surface about 10m away. He had to swim over 
to him to get a response but when he did, the diver was coherent 
and unharmed. The diver explained the problem he had 
experienced with his regulators and confirmed he was able to 
swim to the exit point where other divers were assembled and 
could help if required. The remaining diver descended to the 
buddy pair waiting underwater and gave directions so they could 
complete their dive. He then re-ascended and exited the water to 
check on the diver who had had the problem. Having inhaled 
water and with a buoyant ascent the diver was put on oxygen. An 
ambulance was called and the diver hospitalised for observation 
as a precaution. 
February 2013 13/039 
Two divers were ascending from a 30m dive on a reef having 
deployed a DSMB. One diver appeared on the surface without 
her buddy who was still underwater on the DSMB. She was 
recovered from the water to the RHIB and, having missed 6 min 
of stops, was placed on oxygen as a precaution, given fluids and 
monitored for any symptoms of DCI. The buddy surfaced a few 
minutes later and was recovered into the boat. This was the 
diver's first dive with a new drysuit and she had experienced a 
problem with her shoulder auto dump valve as she was 
ascending to 11m and became too buoyant resulting in a fast 
ascent to the surface. The diver was monitored continuously and 
presented no symptoms up to two days after the dive. 
February 2013 13/030 
An instructor and two students were conducting a training dive 
using compass and a DSMB. On their ascent and at a 10m 
platform, one of the students started to panic. The instructor 
reached for and offered the other student's octopus regulator to 
the panicking student.  The panicking student did not take the 
regulator until the other student took hold of his BCD, gave him 
her octopus regulator which he began breathing from. The 
instructor began to ascend the DSMB line. The student who was 
the rescuer dumped air from her BCD and drysuit to try and 
control buoyancy but the pair ascended too quickly. Once on the 
surface both divers inflated their own BCD's. They had surfaced 
next to the instructor's DSMB and could see his bubbles but not 
him and they raised the alarm that they had lost their instructor. 
He surfaced a few minutes later, reeling in the DSMB and having 
conducted a 1 min safety stop. The students were assisted to 
de-kit and were given oxygen as a safety measure. None of the 
divers were showing any signs of DCI at this time nor did they 
experience any later. 
March 2013 13/052 
A pair of divers were five minutes into their dive in cold water at 4 
deg C when one of them felt his regulator free flowing. As it was 
becoming difficult to breathe he signalled his buddy for them to 
ascend. The pair remained together but as the gauge was 
rapidly dropping, the diver with the free flow made the decision to 
go onto the buddy's AS. It became impossible to see the buddy 
or his AS due to the bubbles and, as the diver lost all air from his 
cylinder, he made the decision to go for the surface breathing out 
all the way. There were no ill effects following the dive and no 
oxygen was given but the diver was monitored for twenty four 
hours. 
April 2013 13/044 
On the third dive of the day, three divers were at 18m when one 
of them experienced a free flow. The diver went to use one of the 
other diver's AS but this also went into free flow so she switched 
to the third diver's AS. When putting this into her mouth the diver 
swallowed a small amount of water, panicked and made a rapid 
ascent. First aid oxygen was administered. 
April 2013 13/239 
MRCC Shetland arranged an ambulance and recompression 
chamber for a diver, from a dive boat, who had made a rapid 
ascent from a dive in Scapa Flow, Orkney.  (Coastguard report). 
April 2013 13/048 
A pair of divers began their dive with one of them struggling to 
descend and being helped down by their buddy. All was well until 
the divers started their slow ascent to a safety stop and the diver, 
who had problems on the descent, was unable to control her 
buoyancy despite dumping all the air from her drysuit and BCD. 
As she was positioned behind her buddy she could not alert him 
to what was happening and she made a rapid ascent to the 
surface. The surface conditions were very choppy with a current 
running along the shore line and the diver was too far out for the 
divers on shore to see or hear her as the wind carried away her 
voice. The diver began to slowly swim towards the shore 
signalling for help every so often. On reaching a rocky outcrop 
but unable to get out of the water, she secured herself, kept 
shouting and waited to be rescued. Help arrived a couple of 
minutes later as her buddy, who had surfaced as soon as he had 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   29 
done a safety stop, had alerted the shore cover that his buddy 
was missing. The diver was helped back to the divers' shore 
base where she was given oxygen and a hot drink. The diver 
was uninjured and suffered no ill effects. 
April 2013 13/067 
Two divers were diving from a hardboat. During the buddy check 
one of the divers lost his grip whilst untangling one of his buddy's 
hoses and the zip from his glove caught on the soft flesh above 
the buddy's right eye. At the end of the dive, the divers ascended 
on a DSMB but whilst carrying out a stop at 6m, air migrated to 
the feet of the 'wounded' diver's drysuit. Unable to become 
vertical and dump air from the suit, the diver drifted upwards. 
She managed to re-join her buddy at 6m but drifted upwards 
once more and gathered pace to reach the surface. Back 
onboard the diver reported that she had experienced air 
migration to the legs of her drysuit throughout the dive but 
managed to control it. However, as a result of worsening cramps 
in both legs since stopping at 9m, she had been unable to get 
vertical and dump air from her drysuit. Her computer indicated 
that 4 min of decompression at 3m had been missed so the diver 
was monitored but did not experience any symptoms that gave 
her or the other divers concern. Two hours later the diver 
indicated that she had a headache and felt it was emanating 
from the now swollen and bruised brow of her right eye. These 
symptoms spread to both eyes but, as a migraine sufferer, she 
thought it was a migraine. The diver was monitored for the rest of 
the day but the symptoms still indicated a migraine and no DCI 
effects were experienced. Following migraine medication, the 
symptoms subsided overnight but the diver was left with a minor 
headache, some minor eye strain and difficulty in focusing. 
Diving continued that day with the eye problems persisting 
initially. The diver visited an optician for a check up and her eye 
problems were fully resolved ten days after the incident. 
April 2013 13/146 
Three divers were at 20m when one of them had a regulator free 
flow. All three made a fast ascent to the surface and, after a long 
surface interval, one of the divers had 'tingles' in her fingers and 
one of the others had pains in his chest. Both divers were 
administered oxygen and, following a call to a hyperbaric 
chamber, all three divers were asked to attend. 
May 2013 13/094 
Two divers were carrying out a dive and at around 42m with little 
of interest and visibility reducing, they decided to begin their 
ascent. As they began the ascent one of the diver's primary 
regulator began to free flow. The diver checked his computer to 
see that he had 95 bar of air remaining and his decompression 
requirement was 4 min at 9m. As the diver had previous 
experience of a free flow, he decided to make a controlled 
ascent to 9m using his remaining air and then switch to his pony 
for the decompression stop. On the ascent at about 24m the 
diver signalled to his buddy he was out of air. He continued to 
breathe down his main cylinder but inhaled water through his 
regulator which stopped him getting any more air. He tried to 
clear the regulator by coughing but to no avail. He swapped to 
his pony regulator but was still unable to breathe any air. The 
buddy offered his alternative air source but the diver declined 
sticking with his pony regulator. Both divers lost buoyancy and 
dropped back down to 45m where the diver was struggling to 
breathe. The buddy immediately grabbed the diver's shoulder 
strap to carry out a controlled buoyant lift but, as the diver's main 
cylinder was completely empty, he was unable to inflate the 
BCD. The buddy then tried to lift them both using his own BCD 
but despite filling it there was no lift so the buddy dropped his 
own weightbelt and they began to ascend. Arriving at the 
surface, the diver was conscious but was struggling to breathe 
and had severe stomach pains. The buddy gave a distress 
signal to the shore party and began a surface tow during which 
the diver belched and regurgitated some water but was talking 
although obviously in distress. Two divers swam out from the 
shore and took over the tow from the buddy. The diver was put 
on oxygen and when the ambulance arrived checks were carried 
out. The diver had no symptoms of DCI  but still had stomach 
pains. When the air ambulance arrived they recommended that 
the divers go to a recompression chamber but the divers 
declined as they were now feeling alright but would continue to 
monitor themselves and would report to the chamber if they had 
any DCI symptoms. The divers had no problems following the 
incident. 
May 2013 13/060 
On a boat dive, two divers were ascending the shotline when 
one of them lost a fin. The buddy signalled he was going to 
retrieve the fin which was floating downwards. He recovered the 
fin but his buddy had let go of the shotline and begun to 
descend. The buddy swam down and took hold of the diver by 
the cylinder handle to arrest her descent. They then started to 
ascend whilst trying to get back to the shotline. The diver who 
had lost the fin was dumping air because she felt she was 
beginning to make an uncontrolled ascent whilst her buddy was 
compensating by putting air in his BCD. Because he had so 
much air in his BCD the diver lost control of the ascent in the last 
10m. Their computers had not gone into decompression but they 
had missed a non-compulsory three minute safety stop. The 
divers were recovered to the boat and given oxygen as a safety 
precaution. Although there were no symptoms of DCI the divers 
went to a recompression chamber for a medical check. Both 
were released on condition that should any symptoms occur they 
return immediately. On examining the fin, the clip that retained 
the fin strap in position was found to have fallen off. 
May 2013 13/241 
Aberdeen MRCC received a 999 call requesting assistance for a 
diver (female) at St Abbs harbour who had missed all 
decompression stops from a 33m dive. Eyemouth CRT and 
ambulance tasked, casualty taken to Borders General hospital 
for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2013 13/072 
Two divers were carrying out a second dive of the day on a 
wreck with a maximum depth of 29m. 25 min into the dive both 
the divers failed to notice that they had gone into 
decompression. They continued their dive for a further 11 min 
before commencing their ascent with an unplanned 25 min 
decompression requirement. On reaching 6m the decompression 
requirement had reduced to 24 min - 3 min at 6m and 21 min at 
3m. The divers failed to notice the shallower ceiling requirement 
and they remained at 6m. This resulted in the remaining 21 min 
of decompression clearing more slowly. 80 min into the dive and 
with 8 min of decompression remaining, their air was becoming 
low. One of the divers took his buddy's AS attached to a pony 
cylinder but was unable to breathe from it as it failed to deliver 
adequate air and was an exceptionally wet breathe. The divers 
surfaced missing the remaining 8 min of stops. The divers were 
recovered to the dive boat and into a heated cabin as both were 
very cold. Neither showed signs of DCI but oxygen and fluids 
were administered as a precaution. A hyperbaric unit was 
contacted and details passed on. As there were no DCI 
symptoms, the divers were advised that recompression would 
not be required but they should be monitored and not dive for the 
next twenty-four hours. The divers successfully completed dives 
later in the week. 
May 2013 13/066 
Rescue 193 was tasked to airlift a 50 year old male from a dive 
boat after he did a rapid ascent; position was 3nm southeast of 
Chapel Point, Cornwall. The casualty was transferred to the 

 
 
  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
30  ©BSAC - 2013 
Diving Diseases Research Centre in Plymouth for treatment. 
Mevagissy and Plymouth Coastguard were also in attendance.  
(Coastguard report). 
May 2013 13/244 
Humber MRCC received a call from a dive RHIB reporting that 
he had a diver onboard who had made a rapid ascent. The male 
aged 41 was on 100% oxygen and being given sips of water. He 
was not showing any symptoms of DCI at the time. A link call 
was established with the Institute of Naval Medicine and the 
diver was taken into South Shields where he was met by 
ambulance and paramedics, together with Sunderland CRT.  
(Coastguard report). 
May 2013 13/145 
At 20m and with 50 bar left in his cylinder, a diver had started to 
ascend when it became uncontrolled. Showing no symptoms he 
was put on oxygen as a precaution. 
June 2013 13/087 
As the tide was turning on a wreck dive, a diver and his buddy 
stopped to deploy a DSMB to start their ascent. Realising the 
current was likely to sweep them off the wreck both divers 
dropped over the side, deployed the DSMB and holding onto 
each other they drifted away from the wreck. The diver realised 
that his buddy was not reeling in the line so signalled for him to 
start doing so, which the buddy did, but then stopped again. The 
diver took the reel from his buddy to control the DSMB and their 
ascent rate. The buddy seemed keen to maintain contact with 
the diver and when they arrived at 9m, having signalled OK to 
each other, they ascended to 6m for 11 min of decompression 
stops. After a minute or so the buddy began pulling and pushing 
the diver as he thought the diver was ascending out of control. 
The diver found himself above 6m and his buddy but, whilst 
finning down to re-join him, became entangled in the DSMB line. 
This happened a couple of times so the diver pushed his buddy 
away from him after passing him the reel and line. As he did so, 
the buddy floated upwards and despite trying to slow his ascent, 
continued to the surface missing approximately 8 min of 
decompression stops at 6m. The diver could see his buddy 
upright on the surface so reached for his own DSMB and reel. 
However, the snap clips of his trim weight and the reel had 
become entangled and the diver was unable to unclip his reel. 
Realising that he was now unable to show his location to the 
surface cover, the diver began to panic. Whilst trying to remove 
his reel he descended to 24m where he deployed his DSMB with 
the reel still attached to his harness but was prepared to cut the 
line if necessary. The diver ascended but at 10m the reel 
jammed so the diver then coiled the line until he reached 6m for 
his decompression stops. The descent to 24m had penalised the 
diver with a total of 12 min decompression stops at 6m which he 
completed without further incident. Both divers were recovered to 
the boat but as the buddy had missed decompression stops he 
was put on first aid oxygen. The Coastguard was contacted and 
they dispatched a lifeboat and helicopter. The buddy was taken 
to a recompression facility as a precautionary measure but did 
not require recompression treatment and was discharged after a 
couple of hours. 
June 2013 13/092 
On the first sea dive of the season a pair of divers entered the 
water from their dive boat. On the surface one of the diver's pony 
cylinder regulator free flowed so the pony cylinder was turned off. 
As they felt the planned dive wasn't particularly deep or 
technically advanced, the buddy pair decided to continue the 
dive. The dive to 25m for 30 min was uneventful. At the agreed 
point to start the ascent one of the divers attempted to deploy an 
integrated cylinder fed DSMB but the cylinder was empty. 
Manual inflation of the DSMB was unsuccessful as the weight of 
the DSMB's cylinder restricted its opening. Both divers continued 
to try to manually inflate the DSMB depleting their main air 
supplies. One of the divers then successfully deployed his own 
DSMB but the line parted so the buddy pair tried to deploy the 
cylinder fed DSMB again but this was unsuccessful. With 
depleted air supplies an ascent was started from 25m and 
continued with a saw tooth profile, possibly due to adverse 
currents, until 15m was reached. At this point one of the divers 
was very low on air and, as his pony cylinder was turned off, he 
took his buddy's AS. Positive contact was made but buoyancy 
control was lost and the pair descended back down to 20m 
before rapidly ascending to 2m where their ascent was stopped. 
Contact was maintained throughout and no causal factors were 
apparent except that a possible up-current had caused the initial 
loss of buoyancy. Having regained control at 2m, the divers 
descended down to 3m where they decided to complete their 
now controlled ascent but missing a 1 min stop at 6m and, 
possibly, a further precautionary stop following the rapid ascent. 
They were recovered by the dive boat and placed on oxygen and 
monitored. Back on shore they were taken to hospital for 
assessment where they were both found to be well, but they 
were advised not to dive again that day. Contact was also made 
with a hyperbaric chamber and their advice was a precautionary 
visit to the nearest recompression chamber as both divers were 
now experiencing tightness across the shoulders and one of 
them had a slight ache and stiffness in the left hand as well as 
tight leg muscles. As this involved a four hour drive and their 
symptoms were subsiding, a decision was made to monitor both 
divers overnight and seek treatment should their condition 
worsen. All symptoms resolved three to four hours after the dive 
with the only residual after-effect being a broken fingernail 
reported by one of the divers. 
June 2013 13/090 
Two divers were completing a 24m wreck dive. The plan was to 
ascend the shotline or, if not returning to the shot, then a DSMB 
was to be used. One of the divers deployed her DSMB but the 
line jammed in the reel and in a panic she did not let go of the 
reel and was pulled to the surface from a depth of 21m. Her 
buddy made a controlled ascent after her but not realising she 
had been pulled to the surface and unable to locate her on the 
ascent, deployed her own DSMB at 12m and carried out a 3 min 
safety stop. The diver had been recovered to the dive boat and 
was under observation when her buddy surfaced. The diver 
showed no symptoms of DCI in the twenty four hours following 
the dive. 
June 2013 13/327 
The casualty successfully completed a hovering skill at 5m and 
then the group proceeded on the tour part of the dive. The tour 
led the group over deeper water and the divers followed the 
route down to approx 18m.  The casualty was seen signalling 
that she was cold and then she attempted to bolt to the surface. 
The instructor and divemaster made contact with the casualty 
and slowed her ascent. On the surface the rescue team were 
alerted; they recovered the divers and brought them to the shore. 
The casualty vomited and looked pale so the emergency 
services were called and she was transported by ambulance to 
hospital. She was checked and discharged with no treatment 
needed. 
June 2013 13/253 
Portland MRCC received a call from a dive vessel reporting that 
a male diver had missed a stop following a dive in the Weymouth 
bay area. Medical advice was taken from the recompression 
chamber at Poole and the casualty kept under observation. No 
problems were experienced so the vessel returned to Portland 
and advice was given to the diver.  (Coastguard report). 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   31 
June 2013 13/149 
A buddy pair had descended down the shotline and on reaching 
the bottom at 32m, one of them experienced a regulator free 
flow. The dive was aborted and both divers made a rapid ascent 
to the surface. Oxygen was administered as a precaution to the 
diver who had experienced the free flow and advice given not to 
dive for twenty-four hours, do no heavy lifting and to drink plenty 
of water. 
June 2013 13/330 
The casualty was part of a group conducting a deep dive. The 
group descended to 36m and then began viewing objects which 
were affected by the pressure change.  During these exercises 
the casualty's regulator began to free flow. The casualty was 
given the instructor's regulator and the instructor switched to her 
alternate source.  The casualty struggled to accept the regulator 
and couldn't clear it, so she began to panic and swim to the 
surface. The instructor held the regulator in the student's mouth 
but was unable to slow the ascent. On the surface the casualty 
was assisted out of the water and monitored for signs of DCI. 
The casualty mentioned that she had 'tingles' and so she was 
given oxygen.  She had a consultation with the recompression 
chamber over the phone.   It was decided that no further 
treatment was needed. 
June 2013 13/143 
A diver using a full face mask and diving on a twin-set found it 
hard to breathe at 32m so removed the mask and went onto his 
buddy's AS. The pair ascended incurring a fast ascent warning. 
The diver was put on oxygen and taken to a first aid station. He 
recovered after forty-five minutes and left the dive site with an 
advice form. 
June 2013 13/108 
A diver attempted to deploy a DSMB at 15m to start his ascent at 
the end of a wreck dive. The line from the reel became entangled 
in his glove's velcro wrist strap during inflation of the DSMB. The 
diver ascended rapidly to 9m before he was able to disentangle 
the strap from the line. He dumped air and tried to slow his 
ascent but was unable to maintain buoyancy for the planned 6m 
safety stop and continued to the surface at a slow rate. His 
computer had showed there were still 20 min of no stop time 
remaining at the start of the ascent and, although showing 
caution for a missed safety stop, displayed no other alarms or 
dive restrictions. The diver was recovered to the dive boat and 
put on oxygen for eight minutes as a precautionary measure but 
no symptoms of DCI were evident. 
June 2013 13/144 
Two divers were at 34m when one of them experienced a 
regulator free flow. The buddy donated her octopus but had to 
hold it in place during a fast ascent. On shore the diver 
complained of 'tingling' in her right hand and felt a bit lightheaded 
and shaky. She was put on oxygen and the 'tingling' 
disappeared. Following oxygen treatment her arm felt 'heavy'. 
She had carried diving equipment some way from a car park to 
the diving entry point and, following contact with a hyperbaric 
chamber, was awaiting a duty doctor to call her direct. 
June 2013 13/225 
Three divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 17m. After 
an uneventful dive one of the divers deployed her DSMB and the 
group began their ascent. At approximately 10m one of the 
divers was unable to locate the toggle for his dump valve and 
made a rapid ascent to the surface. The diver was recovered into 
the cover boat and was given oxygen to breathe as a precaution. 
His buddies ascended normally but cut short their safety stops 
and surfaced without problem and were recovered by the cover 
boat. The boat returned to harbour and the diver's computer was 
checked for information on the depth from which he had 
ascended rapidly. The local recompression chamber was 
contacted for advice and they advised the diver continue on 
oxygen for 30 min and take plenty of fluids. They also advised 
that he be monitored for 24 hours for signs of DCI. No symptoms 
of DCI occurred but the diver refrained from diving again the next 
day. 
June 2013 13/147 
A diver's weightbelt slipped off at 19m resulting in an 
uncontrolled ascent. The diver showed no symptoms but was put 
on oxygen as a precaution and advice given not to dive for at 
least twenty-four hours, no heavy lifting, no alcohol, tea or coffee 
and to drink lots of water. 
July 2013 13/267 
Brixham MRCC were contacted by a dive boat reporting a diver 
having made a rapid ascent from a wreck dive, but was not 
displaying any signs or symptoms of DCI. The diver was taken 
ashore and transferred to a hyperbaric chamber for monitoring.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/333 
The casualty was on the surface with her buddy, who raised the 
alarm. The rescue team headed to the divers to find the casualty 
conscious but distressed and exhausted.  The buddy claimed 
she had been unconscious when he surfaced, and that there had 
been a fast ascent to the surface.  The rescuers placed the 
divers on the boat and took them back to shore where oxygen 
and first aid were administered. The casualty vomited several 
times and an ambulance was called.  The casualty was checked 
in hospital and released the same day. 
July 2013 13/270 
Portland MRCC tasked coastguard helicopter R-104 from Lee on 
Solent to airlift a diver who had missed decompression stops, 
from dive boat, approximately 9.5 miles SSW of the Needles. 
Following medical advice she was taken to Poole where a 
specialist dive doctor was waiting along with South Western 
Ambulance and Poole Coastguards.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/127 
A trainee diver had almost finished his training with one dive to 
complete. He and his instructor were diving from a RHIB on a 
wreck. It was the first dive of the year for the trainee and he  was 
diving in a new drysuit. Everything appeared normal throughout 
but towards the end of the dive the trainee began to experience 
difficulties with his buoyancy. At 19m he became positively 
buoyant and began to ascend. The instructor was unable to 
reach him in time to assist and the trainee made a rapid ascent 
to the surface missing a planned 3 min safety stop  at 6m. During 
the ascent the trainee continued to attempt to dump air from his 
drysuit all the way to the surface to stop his ascent but he 
remained calm and breathed normally throughout. On surfacing 
he signalled to and was recovered by the boat where he was 
immediately administered oxygen. The instructor surfaced a 
short time later. The Coastguard was contacted and patched the 
dive manager through to a hyperbaric unit who spoke to the 
trainee diver. The diver displayed no symptoms of DCI and after 
twenty minutes he came off the oxygen and the RHIB returned to 
shore. After speaking to the dive doctor again it was decided that 
the diver did not need to seek further medical attention but 
should not dive again for twenty-four hours. Over the following 
two days the diver experienced some mild 'pins and needles' and 
other discomfort in his limbs intermittently and contacted the dive 
doctor again. On examination at the hyperbaric unit he was given 
the all clear and his symptoms were not attributed to the diving 
incident. 

 
 
  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
32  ©BSAC - 2013 
August 2013 13/168 
An instructor was taking a student for their first open water dive 
to 8m. During the buddy check the instructor found the student's 
dump valve on his drysuit partially closed so opened it fully 
before starting the dive. The student had some problems getting 
below the surface despite dumping all the air from his suit and 
BCD so he was given an additional weight. Initially on the dive 
the student was struggling to find his balance but then began to 
get his buoyancy under control. The instructor and student 
remained very close to each other and, arriving at the planned 
turn around point, the instructor looked ahead to see where to go 
next. When he turned back to the student, he had disappeared. 
The instructor scanned the area for the student, for any bubbles 
and, with good visibility, checked up at the surface but could not 
see him. The instructor decided his only option was to surface 
and if the student was not there he would raise the alarm. On 
reaching the surface the instructor found the student who 
explained he had an uncontrolled ascent. He was having 
problems with buoyancy and had tried to release air from his suit 
but started to rise to the surface. The instructor checked the 
dump valve and found it closed. The student had no recollection 
of closing the valve but thought he might have done so in trying 
to open it wider to dump air. The student's computer was flashing 
'slow' so the dive was aborted. The instructor monitored the 
student for several hours after the dive and he showed no ill 
effects. 
August 2013 13/177 
A diver and his buddy planned a dive with a maximum depth of 
12m as the buddy was using a drysuit which he had not long had 
but he had completed a drysuit training course a week earlier. 
The plan included the buddy deploying the DSMB at the end of 
the dive, which he had done before but wanted more practice. 
The dive proceeded with no problems and at 10m the buddy 
successfully deployed the DSMB. The divers began to ascend 
but the buddy lost control of his buoyancy and started to rise 
quickly. The diver grabbed the buddy, dumped all the air he 
could but they both ascended to 3m where they stopped before 
slowly rising to the surface. The buddy said he was alright and 
both divers were recovered into their dive RHIB and, as a 
precaution, the buddy was put on oxygen and the diver on nitrox 
35, which was the next richest mix onboard. Back on shore the 
divers did not experience any problems but as a precaution the 
buddy went to a hyperbaric chamber. He was checked over and 
no problems were found but he was advised not to dive for a 
week. 
August 2013 13/298 
Solent MRCC received a call from a dive boat reporting a diver 
onboard who had suffered a rapid ascent from 6m, but was not 
displaying any signs or symptoms of DCI. The dive boat returned 
ashore and medical advice provided by a dive doctor was for the 
diver to monitor their condition for any signs or symptoms.  
(Coastguard report). 
September 2013 13/185 
Two divers on a wreck dive became separated and after a quick 
look around they both decided to surface. One of the divers 
deployed his DSMB and ascended normally. The other diver 
found that his DSMB reel was tangled so decided not to use it. 
He ascended normally up to 7m but dropped back down to 10m 
and then up to the surface in 40 sec. Both divers were recovered 
into their RHIB and the diver who had the fast ascent was put on 
oxygen as a precaution and given some water. His computer 
profile was checked and the Coastguard called. They patched 
the boat through to a diving doctor who was given all the details. 
He advised that the diver come off the oxygen, which he had 
been on for forty minutes, and then be reassessed. As there 
were no symptoms the doctor advised monitoring the diver and 
that he should not dive for the next twenty-four hours. Back on 
shore the diver was checked again but no problems were 
evident. 
September 2013 13/301 
Shetland MRCC was contacted by a dive boat reporting two 
divers onboard having made a rapid ascent after one of them 
lost their weightbelt.  Neither was showing signs or symptoms of 
DCI, however, one of them was unwell. The boat returned to 
harbour and the diver was transferred by ambulance to hospital.  
(Coastguard report). 
September 2013 13/187 
A diver entered the water without his weightbelt which had not 
been highlighted on the buddy check. The diver descended onto 
a wreck at 20m with no problems and continued with the dive. 
After about 20 min the diver began to feel buoyant and realised 
what the problem was. His buddy deployed a DSMB from 16m 
and as they started to ascend the diver lost buoyancy control 
and ascended to the surface next to the DSMB buoy. The buddy 
completed a safety stop and surfaced shortly after. The diver 
was recovered into the dive boat and put on oxygen for forty 
minutes. He reported feeling fine throughout and had no 
symptoms after coming off the oxygen. 
September 2013 13/308 
Solent MRCC received a call from a dive boat requesting 
medical advice for a diver who had suffered a rapid ascent, but 
was not showing any signs or symptoms of DCI.  A radio link call 
was provided with a dive doctor and their advice was to place the 
diver on oxygen, monitor their condition and transfer to hospital 
for assessment on return to shore.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2013 13/309 
Milford Haven MRCC was contacted by a dive boat requesting 
medical advice for a diver who had missed a decompression 
stop, but was not displaying any signs or symptoms of DCI. The 
medical advice was to place the diver on oxygen, keep hydrated 
and maintain contact with the dive doctor for the following 12 
hours as a precaution. Dale CRT met the boat on return to 
harbour to gather details on the incident.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2013 13/214 
A group of divers descended down a line to 27m where they 
practised a series of skills.  They ascended up the shotline to 
15m at which point they had been diving for 10 min. They then 
moved away from the line in order to conduct an exploratory dive 
and adjust their buoyancy.  As they all swam forward the one 
diver lost control of his buoyancy and ascended, then the 
instructor saw him descend back to the group. The diver 
indicated he had ascended to 7m and then come back down. 
They continued diving at 12m, made a safety stop and then 
surfaced.  The diver said he had made a rapid ascent so he was 
monitored for any signs of DCI.  Staff at the site called the 
hyperbaric centre who said they wanted to examine the casualty. 
The diver was airlifted to the chamber. The hyperbaric doctor 
said that the diver was clear of any DCI however he advised that 
he had high blood pressure which needs to be checked by his 
GP. 
 
 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   33 
Technique Incidents 
 
October 2012 13/005 
A diver and his buddy were travelling to a wreck dive site when 
the charter boat skipper alerted the group that another boat was 
heading for the same site. After a briefing from the skipper the 
pair, along with other divers on the boat, began kitting up. 
Others onboard checked the buddy's kit and the diver 
conducted his own check, he had a main cylinder and a pony 
cylinder. Surface conditions were rough and all divers had to 
use the handrails and stanchions to steady themselves whilst 
moving to the entry point. On approaching the shotline the pair 
entered the water and swam to the shotline and descended. 
Once at the bottom of the shot the pair exchanged OK signals 
and swam off to explore the rear gun under the stern at a depth 
of 37m. After viewing and photographing the gun the diver 
suddenly felt his regulator tighten and become difficult to 
breathe. The diver looked for his pony regulator but could not 
locate it and on turning around could not locate his buddy. He 
could see another diver at the limit of visibility but could not 
easily discern an alternate source. The diver decided to make a 
free ascent believing he would get a couple of additional 
breaths during the ascent. The diver initially swam backwards to 
move out from under the stern section and then finned hard for 
the surface. On regaining the surface the diver signalled the 
nearest boat to recover him and on recovery was described as 
"grey and hypoxic" and was placed on oxygen and given a hot 
drink. After a few minutes on oxygen the diver's colour returned 
and he was able to jump back into the water to be recovered by 
his own charter boat. On inspection it was discovered that the 
diver had been breathing from his pony cylinder and had run out 
of gas after a dive duration of 9 min at a maximum depth of 
37m. The pony cylinder had contained nitrox 30. 
February 2013 13/033 
A diver's SMB was said to have been cut by his own support 
boat while he was underwater. The line, attached from the diver 
to the marker buoy had initially wrapped itself round a crab pot 
buoy line. The support boat went to untangle it but the line got 
dragged under the vessel and was either caught by the boat's 
prop or it snapped. The diver was unaware of what had 
happened until he was about 2m from the surface and was 
ready to deploy another marker buoy that he carried with him. 
He surfaced and was recovered to another boat that had been 
sent to the scene. (Media report). 
March 2013 13/096 
A diver was on his second sea dive having completed a 
rebreather course. At the end of the dive the diver prepared to 
deploy the DSMB for the buddy pair to ascend. The self inflating 
DSMB had been used on the diver's first dive but with the A-
clamp not compatible for filling the DSMB cylinder from his DIN 
stage cylinder, the diver planned to inflate the DSMB from one 
of his alternate air sources. The diver chose to inflate the DSMB 
with his auto-air which was fed from the 3 lt diluent cylinder, 
which had been partially used during the previous dive. 
Consequently, shortly after deploying the DSMB the diver found 
there was nothing to breathe in his CCR loop. The diver bailed 
out to the auto-air and found exactly the same so bailed out 
onto his stage cylinder. The buddy checked the diluent gauge 
and it was reading empty. He tried to inflate the diver's drysuit 
but not hearing any inflation noise, carried out a controlled 
buoyant lift. 
April 2013 13/180 
Two divers planned a dive to complete a number of 
assessments, air sharing, DSMB deployment, use of SMB and 
a surface tow. All went to plan apart from a drysuit hose 
connector becoming disconnected but which did not appear to 
be leaking and, as the diver had sufficient air in her suit for the 
depth, she did not try to reconnect it. On the ascent at about 
14m the diver took her buddy's octopus indicating she was out 
of air. The divers continued to ascend completing appropriate 
stops. On the surface the diver orally inflated her BCD and 
completed the planned rescue tow to the shore. 
April 2013 13/142 
A diver was completing the last dive of a training course. He 
and his buddy had descended to 20m but the diver was over-
weighted, began to breathe fast and started to take in water. 
The diver made the decision to go to the surface. Once ashore 
the diver was checked over and all appeared well. 
April 2013 13/068 
An assistant instructor and his trainee were planning to carry 
out a drysuit inversion exercise and AS ascents. On initial entry 
there was a problem with the trainee's loose weightbelt and 
unable to adjust this on the surface, the divers exited the water 
where the surface cover resolved the problem. The divers re-
entered the water and descended to a 4m platform to carry out 
the inversion exercise. The trainee's weightbelt became loose 
again but the instructor managed to reposition and tighten it and 
the inversion exercise was carried out with no problems. The 
pair then moved away from the platform to around 6m to begin 
the AS ascent exercises but the trainee immediately descended 
to 14m. The instructor followed him down and found the trainee 
who was having trouble controlling buoyancy with his BCD. The 
pair started to ascend and at around 8m they drifted towards a 
rock face. As the trainee was still having difficulty with his 
buoyancy the instructor pushed him into the rocks to stabilise 
him and sort out the problem. The trainee's waist band had 
become unclipped, probably during the earlier problems. The 
instructor re-clipped the waist band and the pair stopped for a 
few moments to calm down and check if they were alright and 
either carry on or abort the dive. The divers then moved away 
from the rock face and ascended to 6m in order to start the AS 
exercise but the trainee carried on upwards and surfaced. The 
instructor also surfaced, asked if the trainee was OK to carry on 
and they both re-descended to 6m but the trainee continued 
down to 10m. When the instructor caught up with him, the 
buddy signalled OK and they ascended to 6m again to start the 
AS exercise. The instructor decided to be the receiver so as to 
have some control on the ascent but, even when dumping all 
the air from his own BCD, the ascent became quicker and 
quicker. Back at the surface the instructor decided to try the 
exercise the other way round with him as the donor of his AS to 
the trainee as he felt he would be more in control. The pair re-
descended to 6m and began the exercise but, despite the 
instructor putting air in his own BCD, they continued to 
descend. The instructor did not want to let go of his trainee 
because he felt he would continue on downwards and he was 
unsure of the depth beneath them. They levelled off at around 
13m and, with the instructor's BCD now full , they began to 
gradually ascend. Despite venting all the air from his BCD and 
drysuit, the instructor and trainee were still ascending. The 
instructor then noticed that his AS was not in the trainee's 
mouth so he grabbed the trainee's primary regulator and put it 
up to his mouth. The trainee initially pushed it away and the 
instructor tried again whilst considering releasing the trainee's 
weightbelt and sending him to the surface. The trainee took the 
regulator and the divers surfaced. The instructor inflated the 
trainee's BCD to find there was already air in it. The trainee 
coughed for a couple of minutes and the divers aborted any 
more diving and exited the water. The trainee calmed down and 
didn't exhibit any ill effects. 

 
 
  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
34  ©BSAC - 2013 
May 2013 13/148 
At 3m on his ascent a diver lost control of his BCD; he was 
unable to inflate it and was struggling to maintain buoyancy. 
The diver dropped his weight and inflated his drysuit to help him 
get to and stay on the surface. He called for assistance and was 
picked up by a rescue boat. The diver experienced dizziness so 
oxygen first aid was administered as a precaution. It was 
subsequently discovered that the BCD inflation hose was not 
connected. 
June 2013 13/098 
Three divers were diving together. The aim of the dive was to 
introduce the less experienced diver of the three to UK diving. 
The plan was to descend to a 6m shelf, allow the less 
experienced diver to familiarise himself with the visibility etc. 
and, if all was good, to then move down to a 20m shelf. They 
would spend a short amount of time there before returning to 
6m to carry out a practice mask removal and refit and a safety 
stop. The divers descended to 6m and after checking that the 
less experienced diver was happy, the group gradually 
descended to 20m. Frequent signals passed between the group 
that all was well and although the visibility was poor, the divers 
remained together. After approximately 5 min the less 
experienced diver suddenly stopped moving and began to 
frantically gesture that he wanted to return to the surface. 
Immediately the senior diver in the group made positive contact 
with the diver and ensuring that the third diver was aware of the 
situation, she signalled that the group ascend. At this point the 
third diver deployed his DSMB to ensure a point of reference for 
the group. The less experienced diver was clearly panicking 
and unable to operate his equipment safely so the senior diver 
performed a controlled buoyant lift. At around 10m, the diver 
began to calm down and, while still maintaining control of him, 
the senior diver decided it would be safe to complete a safety 
stop at 6m. A 3 min safety stop was completed and all three 
divers surfaced and swam to their exit point. The less 
experienced diver believed the onset of his panic attack was 
most probably a result of the thermocline he felt and a rush of 
cold water into his gloves which led to a noticeable increase in 
his breathing rate. He also believed he was suffering from 
narcosis. 
 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   35 
Equipment Incidents 
 
January 2013 13/024 
During a dive to 35m a diver experienced a regulator free flow. 
The diver alerted his buddy to the problem whilst trying to clear 
the free flow but was unsuccessful resulting in an emptying of 
his main cylinder. He switched to his pony regulator and he and 
his buddy conducted a controlled ascent. On the 3 min safety 
stop at 6m the pony began to run out of air so the diver 
switched to the buddy's AS and they completed the safety stop 
and ascended to the surface where he manually inflated his 
BCD and exited the water. 
February 2013 13/029 
An instructor and student entered the water for the student's 
final qualifying dive in a quarry with very cold fresh water of 5 
deg C.  Shortly after the start of the dive at a depth of 4m the 
student's regulator began to free flow. The free flow could not 
be stopped and the instructor provided her octopus and the pair 
made an AS ascent to the surface without further incident. The 
additional bubbles were noted by the surface cover and support 
divers swam out to offer assistance but none was required. 
February 2013 13/203 
A diver and his buddy had completed a 21m dive so the diver 
could check out weighting with his new kit configuration using 
twin independently run 10 lt cylinders and practise switching 
regulators. The air temperature was 1 deg C, it was snowing 
and the water temperature was 4 deg C. After a surface interval 
of one and three quarter hours, the second dive to 21m went 
according to plan. At approximately 12 min into the dive and at 
about 20m, the diver carried out a regulator switch which was 
successful but the removed regulator started to free flow. The 
diver, breathing normally from his second cylinder, tried to stop 
the free flow by purging, banging and turning the regulator 
upside-down and then trying to breathe from it but choked on a 
mouthful of water. The buddy offered his octopus but the diver 
pointed to the working regulator in mouth, showed him the free 
flow cylinder contents and gave the OK signal although he was 
coughing and spluttering. While trying to resolve the problem 
both divers had begun to ascend slightly so the diver gave his 
buddy the 'up' signal to terminate the dive. They both made a 
normal ascent to 6m by which time the regulator had stopped 
free flowing with the cylinder contents gauge reading empty. 
They carried out a 4 min safety stop at 6m and ascended where 
the diver provided surface buoyancy using his drysuit feed as 
the BCD feed was run from the now empty cylinder. He orally 
inflated his BCD and the divers exited the water with no further 
problems. 
February 2013 13/202 
Three divers had planned a shore dive with a gradual descent 
to 20m. The water temperature was 4 deg C. One of the divers 
had replaced his own regulator, which had a small constant 
flow, for a club one. He was diving twin independent 12 lt 
cylinders with 150 bar in the right hand cylinder and 180 bar in 
the left. The club regulator was fitted to the right hand cylinder, 
which out of habit, the diver used for the start of the dive. On 
the descent and at about 6m the diver realised he was using 
the cylinder with the least amount of air and decided to switch 
but the regulator began to free flow. The diver tried to resolve 
the problem but continued to breathe off the free flowing 
regulator. Although his two buddies were in sight they were not 
in immediate reach so the diver ascended. On the surface the 
diver swam back to the dive manager who shut off the free 
flowing cylinder. The buddies, realising the diver had ascended, 
had finned back and were below him and he signalled to them 
not to surface. With 180 bar in the left cylinder the diver opted to 
continue the dive and descended to re-join his buddies. He 
controlled his  buoyancy using his BCD which was fed by the 
left cylinder as his drysuit feed was configured to run from the 
now shut off right cylinder. At 20m the suit squeeze was quite 
uncomfortable but the diver was more concerned with the 
restriction of movement. He signalled to one of his buddies to 
partially open the right hand cylinder valve and the system 
repressurised without causing a free flow. The dive continued 
without further incident. 
April 2013 13/093 
Three divers were planning a dive to 30m. Two of the divers 
had single cylinders with primary and octopus second stages 
and one had an independent pony cylinder. The divers 
descended down the shotline but almost immediately upon 
arriving at the bottom of the shot, one of the diver's primary 
second stage began to free flow causing her to switch to her 
octopus. One of her buddies noticed this and offered his 
octopus which she took and he tried for a short time to stop the 
free flow but to no avail. The diver and buddy prepared to 
ascend together and, in preparation, the buddy looked over to 
the third diver only to notice that he was having the same 
problem with a regulator free flow causing him to switch to his 
octopus. The buddy offered the third diver his pony regulator 
which he took. All three divers ascended close together up the 
shotline to the surface without incident. On reaching the 
surface, both the divers who had free flowing regulators had 
less than 30 bar remaining in their cylinders. 
May 2013 13/074 
Two divers were practising mid water DSMB deployment using 
the AS run from one of the diver's first stage. Having inflated the 
DSMB successfully, the AS free flowed. Unable to stop it the 
diver switched to his buddy's AS which was run from a pony 
cylinder. The buddy switched off the diver's air supply to stop 
the free flow but when the supply was turned on again the 
regulator continued to free flow. The buddy switched off the 
supply and the divers made a controlled ascent including a 3 
min safety stop at 6m. On the surface the buddy supported the 
diver whilst restoring his air supply to allow BCD inflation. The 
free flow did not restart as the air supply was restored. The 
incident was put down to cold water, which was about 5 deg C. 
May 2013 13/062 
An instructor and two students were performing mask clearing 
exercises. As one of the students removed his mask his 
regulator went into free flow. Unable to replace his mask and in 
the panic that ensued, the student removed his regulator 
because he thought he was inhaling water and tried to ascend 
to the surface. The instructor prevented the ascent and pushed 
the free flowing regulator back into the student's mouth. The 
instructor could not locate the student's octopus regulator and 
by this time the student was desperate to reach the surface. 
The instructor maintained the hold on the free flowing regulator 
in the student's mouth and conducted a controlled buoyant lift to 
the surface. On the surface and with the student's BCD inflated, 
help was summoned. A rescue boat arrived and recovered all 
the divers, the second student having made his way safely to 
the surface. On shore oxygen was given but it became apparent 
that the student had not inspired water and, apart from the 
shock of the incident, had not suffered injury. 
May 2013 13/083 
Following exit from a wreck penetration dive, a diver noticed 
panic in his buddy's eyes. The buddy grabbed the diver's pony 
cylinder AS and, from the mass of bubbles around the pair, the 

 
 
  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
36  ©BSAC - 2013 
diver presumed the buddy had experienced a free flow and was 
out of air. The diver tried to calm the buddy down but, as the 
buddy was very unsettled, began an AS ascent and they 
reached the surface without further incident. The diver ensured 
the buddy was buoyant and attempted to get him to lie back and 
relax but the buddy would not let go of the diver and was using 
him to lift himself out of the water. The diver's pony AS had run 
out of gas and the buddy would not take the diver's octopus 
regulator. The buddy kept saying he was tired and could not fin 
so the diver attempted to turn him to start a tow to the shore. 
The buddy continued to hold on fighting the attempts of a tow 
and preventing the diver from finning effectively. At this point 
the diver signalled for help which arrived very quickly. The 
divers were taken ashore and the buddy assessed during which 
he remembered he had 'lost' his regulator when following the 
diver out of the wreck when the diver's fin had brushed it from 
his mouth. The buddy was monitored for the rest of the day and 
for the following thirty-six hours. 
June 2013 13/099 
Two divers were coming towards the end of their dive and 
returning to their exit point when one of the divers started to 
ascend rapidly but managed to grab hold of part of an 
underwater construction. His buddy immediately moved closer 
to the diver and saw the cause of the problem. The diver's 
weightbelt had come off and was lying on the bottom next to 
him. As the diver was unable to recover or fit the belt on his 
own, the buddy went to assist but it was awkward with the diver 
in a vertical position. The buddy placed the belt between the 
diver and his cylinder and rolled the diver on his back as the 
weight was holding him down albeit around the cylinder rather 
than his waist. The buddy then straddled the diver's legs to hold 
him steady and refitted the belt correctly and securely. Once the 
belt was re-fitted, the diver regained his normal attitude, calmed 
his breathing and signalled OK. The divers decided to abort the 
dive using the shotline attached to the underwater construction. 
Once they surfaced they swam back to their exit point. 
July 2013 13/119 
Two trainee divers were on their first open water lesson and 
one of them, who had always been somewhat anxious during 
training but was very enthusiastic, had hired equipment from the 
local dive centre, including a drysuit. Because he was hiring, 
the trainee had not had an opportunity to use a drysuit in a pool. 
The hired suit accommodated his height and foot size but, as 
the trainee was very slim, there was a lot of extra material 
around his waist and upper body. Both trainees and the 
instructor kitted up and entered the water to chest depth to carry 
out weight checks assisted by another instructor carrying 
weights to the group. The trainee with the hired suit was having 
difficulty getting all the air out and because of this was 
becoming increasingly anxious. At this point another group of 
divers arrived nearby and one of their instructors, who was on 
the shore, began commenting in a loud voice to his group that 
the trainee needed to dump air from his suit. This was clearly 
audible to the trainee having difficulty and he later reported that 
this had added to his anxiety. At this point the instructor, who 
had been helping with the weight check, kitted up and took care 
of the trainee who was having difficulties, leaving his fellow 
instructor to dive with the other trainee. The trainee in the large 
drysuit was then able to dump all the air to a point where he 
complained it felt very tight but he was still unable to get 
underwater. He removed his weightbelt to add more weight and 
put it back on but a passing member of the dive centre staff, 
who had been working in a nearby safety boat came over and 
pointed out, very assertively, that the trainee's weightbelt had 
been put on 'left handed' and it should be 'right handed'. The 
staff member then engaged in a long and somewhat aggressive 
discussion as to why the trainee had not been taught to have 
his weightbelt 'right handed' and that he required it to be that 
way because, if he had to rescue the trainee, he would need it 
to be positioned that way so he was able to remove it. Other 
groups of divers nearby then added to the discussion pointing 
out that it was possible to remove a weightbelt regardless of 
which way it was fastened. The trainee, clearly upset by all of 
this, removed and refitted his weightbelt. He and his instructor 
then descended to 2m to begin some exercises but the trainee 
immediately gave the 'up' signal and they both made a 
controlled ascent to the surface. On the surface the trainee 
removed his regulator and began shouting 'Help, I can't 
breathe'. The instructor made him buoyant by inflating his BCD 
but did not remove the weightbelt as the trainee's head was well 
clear of the water. The trainee kept shouting for help and the 
rescue boat came to his assistance, de-kitted him in the water 
and recovered him into the boat where he became calmer and 
denied any other problems. The trainee later reported that he 
had felt anxious about his first dive and the involvement of all 
the other divers while he was having difficulty did not help. He 
also felt his drysuit was tight and he was unable to get his 
breath. The trainee decided not to dive again that day but has 
since gone back to the pool to refresh his skills and intends to 
complete his training. 
July 2013 13/115 
An instructor and his trainee were practising neutral buoyancy 
when the student lost a fin. The student dropped 2-3m, 
experienced ear pain and became distressed so the instructor 
recovered her to the surface using a controlled buoyant lift. On 
the surface the student was towed to shore and subsequently 
recovered. 
August 2013 13/226 
A group of three divers descended to a wreck and reached a 
maximum depth of 35m. The lead diver located a large 
cavernous space in the wreck and signalled the others to follow 
her into it. One diver followed but the other remained outside 
and was observed waving his torch. The lead diver swam 
towards him and he signalled he was unhappy and wanted to 
ascend. He signalled that his regulator was free flowing and had 
switched to his 3 lt pony supply. The lead diver offered him her 
octopus from her twin 10 lt cylinders and he switched to this 
supply and the group swam back to the shotline which was 
approximately 40m away. After a dive time of 6 min the group 
started to ascend at a normal rate although the lead diver's 
computer started to signal a  fast ascent alert at 11m and added 
a 1 min stop as a consequence. The group slowed and they 
paused for 1 min before continuing the ascent. At 6m the lead 
diver swapped the diver onto her nitrox 80 decompression gas 
for increased safety and the group conducted a 2 min safety 
stop and surfaced safely after a total dive time of 15 min. 
 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   37 
Miscellaneous Incidents 
 
October 2012 13/230 
Brixham Coastguard tasked Teignmouth inshore lifeboat and 
Torbay Coastguard  to a report from a concerned father of two 
divers at Babbacombe who had not been seen for 15 min. 
However the two divers surfaced without any distress or injury 
before units got on scene. No further action taken after 
confirmation from the father that both divers were alright. FAWGI 
(False alarm good intent).  (Coastguard report). 
November 2012 13/234 
Solent coastguard received a report of two divers 'in frogman 
suits one with green tank one with grey tank, using spear guns 
with their tanks'.  The informant believed it to be illegal and they 
had just entered the water.  (Not illegal, but due care must be 
observed).  (Coastguard report). 
January 2013 13/236 
Falmouth MRCC, tasked Falmouth coast rescue team, Falmouth 
RNLI Inshore lifeboat and RN rescue helicopter R193 after a 
report of divers in difficulty off Gyllingvase beach, Falmouth. The 
divers were apparently giving the diver in distress signal and one 
was possibly missing from the party. It was established by the 
Coastguards arriving on scene that nobody was in danger. There 
had been a misunderstanding of signals.  (Coastguard & RNLI 
reports). 
May 2013 13/246 
Falmouth MRCC passed a personal locator beacon (PLB) alert 
to Stornoway MRCC for action, the PLB (406 beacon) was 
attributed to a diver onboard a dive boat in Loch Aline.  The 
vessel was contacted and following a search of the vessel 
confirmed that the PLB was onboard but divers were safely 
ashore.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2013 13/255 
Belfast MRCC received multiple 999 calls reporting a party of 
divers waving for help off Wemyss Bay, Firth of Clyde. Largs 
lifeboat, Largs CRT and Rescue 100 were tasked. Divers made 
shore unaided and link call established to dive doctor. 
Subsequently one diver transferred to Inverclyde A&E for 
assessment.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
June 2013 13/313 
Lifeboat launched to assist diver.  False alarm.  (RNLI report). 
July 2013 13/273 
MRCC Dover received a 999 call from a shore contact reporting 
a dive boat with three persons onboard, overdue returning from 
their dive, 10 min after the initial call was received the informant 
called back to confirm they had now returned safely ashore.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2013 13/120 
A group of divers noticed that there was a large number of 
lobsters at the dive site; most of the lobsters were quite young 
and aggressive. One of the group was diving with his buddy and 
watching one of these lobsters fairly closely when the lobster 
attached itself to the hose of his second stage. The result was 
that the diver could not get any air so switched to his pony until 
his buddy managed to prise the lobster off the hose and allow 
the diver to switch back to breathing from his main cylinder. 
July 2013 13/138 
After a 60 min dive to 12m, a rebreather diver deployed her 
DSMB and together with her buddy ascended to 6m for a 3 min 
safety stop. After about a minute the diver found herself slowly 
floating towards the surface away from her buddy for no 
apparent reason. She had not added gas to her drysuit nor 
moved position. She tried to dump all the air from her suit but 
this made no difference and she looked up to see if the DSMB 
line had snagged or got caught on something although no other 
lines were visible near the divers. On looking up she found the 
problem immediately. A seal had decided to roll himself up in the 
DSMB line and every turn it took pulled the diver towards the 
surface. The diver attempted to untie him but the seal seemed to 
think this was a game and rolled itself up even more. After about 
thirty seconds the seal unrolled itself, swam up and tried to eat 
the DSMB instead. The diver reeled in the extra line she had 
reeled out to counteract the seal's rolling but it came back down, 
bit the line and rolled itself in it again. The diver released line as 
the seal rolled so as not to endanger either of them and the seal 
then unrolled itself and swam off. 
July 2013 13/283 
Solent MRCC was made aware of a dive boat that was reported 
as overdue by their dive officer. While details were being taken 
the dive officer advised he had received a text message 
reporting them safe and well back in harbour. FAGI.  
(Coastguard report). 
August 2013 13/288 
Humber MRCC tasked Redcar ILB and Redcar CRT to 
investigate a report of a diver who appeared to have been 
submerged about an hour from a boat close inshore. The diver 
found to be in no need of assistance.  (Coastguard & RNLI 
reports). 
August 2013 13/165 
Portland MRCC received a 999 call from a fisherman ashore that 
they had seen a single diver with twin cylinders entering the 
water as it was getting dark but had not seen them exit. Portland 
Bill CRT proceeded to investigate and a fisherman further along 
the shore confirmed the diver had exited the water.  (Coastguard 
report). 
September 2013 13/304 
Brixham MRCC took a 999 call reporting three divers in the 
water shouting for assistance. A RHIB proceeded to investigate 
and Plymouth ILB investigated and found the divers safe and 
well.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
 
 

 
 
  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
38  ©BSAC - 2013 
Overseas Incidents 
 
Fatalities 
October 2012 13/212 
A diver gave the 'up' signal to her buddy having just descended 
onto a 25m wreck. The divers began a gradual ascent but 
halfway up, the diver became motionless. The buddy lifted the 
diver to the surface quickly and, at 6m, the diver's regulator fell 
out. On the surface the diver was unconscious so the buddy 
dumped dive kit and towed the diver to shore. CPR was 
administered and the diver evacuated to hospital but she did not 
recover and was declared deceased. A coroner's inquest is 
reported to have stated that the cause of death was barotrauma.  
(Media report). 
March 2013 13/038 
A group of divers on a liveaboard were diving from two 
inflatables. One group were about to commence their dive when 
they received a call over the radio regarding a missing diver who 
had suddenly disappeared from the surface. A surface search 
was carried out for about fifteen minutes looking for bubbles to 
try and locate the diver. Although kitted up and ready to assist in 
an underwater search, the divers were returned to the 
liveaboard. The expedition dive guides carried out an underwater 
search and found the missing diver unconscious at a depth of 
5m. Following recovery from the water and after eighty-five 
minutes of CPR and medical attention by the ship's doctor the 
diver was pronounced dead. 
May 2013 13/097 
A diver was on a guided tour in a group of five led by a dive 
instructor. About 16 min into the dive and at 20m on the ascent, 
the instructor noticed the diver motionless in the water. The 
instructor got hold of the diver and not getting any reaction 
began to ascend with him.  As soon as this happened the diver 
suddenly started to swim hard towards the surface and pulled his 
regulator from his mouth. The instructor tried to push the 
regulator back to the diver but he pushed it away and the pair 
made a rapid ascent to the surface. On the surface the diver was 
assessed by the instructor and was found not to be breathing 
and foaming from the mouth. The instructor summoned help and 
administered rescue breaths while towing the diver to the shore. 
Three other divers from the shore jumped in and assisted in 
getting the diver out of the water. CPR was administered by 
three staff from a local hospital who happened to be on the site 
and an ambulance had already been called. The ambulance 
arrived and although the diver appeared to be breathing with a 
weak pulse he never regained consciousness. He was declared 
dead after forty-five minutes. 
May 2013 13/076 
A diver was reported to have been diving a deep wreck at 
around 90m using a rebreather when he got into difficulties. The 
diver surfaced unconscious and resuscitation attempts were 
made but he did not recover. (Media report). 
June 2013 13/101 
A rebreather diver entered the water along with a second 
rebreather diver for a wreck dive. Both descended the shotline 
when the first rebreather diver apparently began to sink rapidly 
and overtook the other diver, who thought it was fast but decided 
it was just the diver's way of descending. After a couple of 
minutes the second diver arrived on the wreck and spotted the 
other diver lying on his back in the base of a hold in 45m 
apparently having fallen or descended straight down into the 
hold. The second diver found the diver's loop was not in his 
mouth, he was unresponsive and did not accept a bailout 
regulator. The diver carried out an immediate lift to the surface 
where the distressed diver was recovered to the boat. CPR was 
commenced by the crew and other divers aboard. A Coastguard 
helicopter airlifted the diver to hospital but he was declared dead 
on arrival. 
August 2013 13/153 
A diver died whilst snorkelling during an expedition. Having 
completed a dive, the diver joined a group of five others for a 
swim and snorkel on a shallow reef. The diver was reported to 
have surfaced normally following a snorkel dive but was then 
seen to disappear below the surface very shortly afterwards. The 
diver was clearly visible from the surface on the reef below but, 
despite frantic efforts, was unable to be reached by the group 
using snorkelling equipment. The diver was recovered by divers 
but, despite CPR at the surface to arrival at hospital, failed to 
regain consciousness and was pronounced dead. 
 
 
Decompression Illness 
October 2012 13/021 
Following a second dive on a holiday liveaboard, a diver 
exhibited a rash accompanied by skin looking like 'bubble wrap' 
over the abdomen and on his right hand side. As a skin DCI was 
suspected first aid oxygen was administered together with fluids. 
The rash became less prominent and the 'bubble wrap' skin 
returned to normal. A recompression chamber was contacted. 
Although options for a faster transfer were available, the advising 
chamber felt that given the reduction in symptoms and first aid 
provision available on the boat, this was not necessary and 
arrangements were made for transfer to a hyperbaric unit for a 
consultation the following evening. The diver was recompressed 
the following evening and a skin DCI was diagnosed with a 
suspect subcutaneous emphysema, although this was longer 
symptomatic. Following return visits for check ups, the diver was 
advised he was fit to fly and return to the UK. 
October 2012 13/013 
A diver started a dive on a wreck with a 15 lt cylinder and 7 lt 
sling cylinder. He descended with his buddy to the wreck and 
reached a maximum depth of 28m.  The dive proceeded without 
incident until the pair returned to the shotline to start their ascent. 
During the ascent the diver was in a horizontal position possibly 
due to the weight of the sling cylinder and as a result the diver 
was unable to get air out of the legs of his drysuit. He made a 
feet first, fast ascent direct to the surface missing 1 min of 
required decompression stops and 3 min safety stops with a total 
dive time of 30 min. On recovery into the boat the diver was 
placed on oxygen but no symptoms were evident. Two days after 
the incident the diver experienced pains in his muscles and at 
the site of previous injuries. The diver was referred to a 
recompression chamber where he received treatment. 
November 2012 13/014 
A group of divers conducted a chamber dive to a maximum 
depth of 57m as an educational experience including tests for 
the effects of narcosis. The dive was for a total duration of 60 
min including decompression stops at 15, 12, 9, 6 and 3m for a 
total of 32 min. After completion of the dive and leaving the 
chamber one diver experienced an itching and burning sensation 
around her left shoulder. Around five hours later the diver 
experienced a red rash on her left shoulder and the area around 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   39 
it was warm and painful under the skin. The next day the red skin 
had disappeared but the pain in the shoulder joints persisted. A 
week after the original chamber dive the diver received a 
recompression treatment with hyperbaric oxygen therapy. The 
others in the group experienced no adverse effects. 
November 2012 13/015 
A group of divers conducted a chamber dive to a maximum 
depth of 57m as an educational experience including tests for 
the effects of narcosis. The dive was for a total duration of 60 
min including decompression stops at 15, 12, 9, 6 and 3m for a 
total of 32 min. During the final ascent from the 3m stop one of 
the divers in the chamber started to experience itching under his 
arms, tinnitus in his left ear and on leaving the chamber 
experienced dizziness. A doctor provided antihistamine for the 
itchiness and checked his ears and balance. The diver's left 
eardrum seemed to be irritated. The diver was recompressed 
with oxygen to 14m for two hours and experienced an initial 
worsening of the dizziness but this almost disappeared by the 
end of the second hour although the tinnitus remained. A 
subsequent visit to a ENT specialist indicated no clear issues. 
The diver has been referred for a PFO investigation. Two other 
divers in the group experienced itching at 3m and this became 
more intense on surfacing. The chamber doctor provided 
antihistamines for the itching. One diver took them and his 
symptoms disappeared the same evening. The other diver did 
not take the drugs and his itching did not disappear until the next 
day. The others in the group experienced no adverse effects. 
March 2013 13/129 
On the first dive of the second day on a dive trip abroad and half 
way though the dive, a diver felt slightly dizzy at 24m but this 
passed fairly quickly. The rest of the dive was uneventful with no 
fast ascent or missed decompression stops. On surfacing the 
diver was holding onto the bow line of the dive RHIB which 
jerked his left arm so hard he let go. Back on shore the diver 
assisted with removing kit from the RHIB and returned to the 
dive centre for lunch. After lunch he noticed that he had a skin 
rash and felt itchy. One of the dive guides, being an operator at a 
local private hyperbaric chamber, recommended the diver be 
checked out at a local clinic. The diver was seen by a doctor who 
diagnosed DCI and the diver was transferred to the chamber and 
received recompression treatment, followed by a second 
treatment the following morning. On return to the UK the diver 
saw a diving doctor who restricted his diving to a maximum of 
20m and recommended a PFO test which the diver was still 
awaiting. 
April 2013 13/124 
A diver had completed a diving holiday with thirteen dives over 
five days. On Saturday, the last day of the holiday, and four to 
five hours after completing the last dive, the diver experienced 
pain in her right shoulder. She thought she might have strained a 
muscle in her neck and took painkillers. On returning home the 
pain got steadily worse until the Tuesday evening when the pain 
intensified. The diver went to her doctor who referred her to 
hospital and they eventually referred her to a hyperbaric 
chamber. The diver was diagnosed with DCI and had three 
sessions of recompression treatment and was expected to make 
a full recovery. Although the dive profiles were not abnormal the 
fact that the diver had done thirteen dives over five days is 
thought to have contributed to her suffering DCI. 
April 2013 13/053 
On the last day of diving on a trip overseas and at the Saturday 
evening BBQ, a diver turned round quickly to look over her 
shoulder and became dizzy. She put this down to drinks having 
quickly gone to her head. The following morning she still felt a bit 
dizzy as if she was still slightly drunk but assumed this was a 
hangover and felt fine after more sleep. Later that day she 
thought her arm felt a bit strange but no pain or 'pins and 
needles', just a bit uncomfortable. Two days later and now back 
home in the UK, the diver felt very tired and a bit 'spaced out' but 
thought it was due to a late night after getting back from the trip 
and an early start the next morning for work. The rest of the 
week followed with early mornings and late nights but over the 
weekend the diver, when turning her head to look over her 
shoulder felt dizzy. Two days later her arm was still feeling 
strange, was also a bit weak and she started feeling aching and 
discomfort in her shoulder. The diver called a hyperbaric 
chamber for advice and they said it sounded like DCI and that 
she should go in for a check up the following day. The chamber 
diagnosed a probable DCI and the diver was given a couple of 
sessions of recompression treatment and the symptoms 
resolved. 
April 2013 13/223 
A diver had conducted at least two dives the previous day the 
last, after a surface interval of 2 hours, to a maximum depth of 
40m for a total duration of 40 min including 6 min of stops. The 
following day he conducted two dives; the first to 37m for 41 min 
including a 6 min stop and, after a surface interval of 1 hr 20 min, 
to 39m for 47 min including stops of 3 min at 9m and 6 min at 
6m.  The diver used twin 12 lt cylinders with nitrox 28 and a 7 lt 
stage with nitrox 50 for decompression.  All dives were 
uneventful. On surfacing from the final dive the diver 
experienced a slight cough but thought nothing of it. Once back 
on shore the diver unloaded his equipment from the boat into the 
dive centre vehicles and felt a bit of a strain in his arms which he 
attributed to carrying the heavy twin-set.  As the diver was 
travelling back to the dive centre he began to feel a tightness in 
his chest. The group arrived back at the dive centre 
approximately an hour after surfacing and the diver noticed what 
appeared to be bruising on his biceps. After visiting the toilet the 
diver looked in the mirror and noticed that his chest was covered 
in a marbled rash. The diver requested oxygen but there was 
none available and so he breathed from his nitrox 50 stage 
cylinder. The diver was driven to a local chamber where he was 
recompressed with three treatments over three days of 6 hr, 3 hr 
and 3 hr respectively.  On returning to the UK the diver was 
tested and found to have PFO and has had an operation to close 
it.  He was advised to refrain from diving for 9 - 12 months and to 
have further tests. 
August 2013 13/222 
After completing three dives the previous day a diver conducted 
dives of 40m for 30 min, 31m for 38 min and 36m for 27 min 
including a 3 min stop at 5m. Approximately 40 min after 
surfacing from the third dive the diver noticed an itchy bluish rash 
on his abdomen. The diver attended a recompression facility and 
was recompressed. 
August 2013 13/183 
Two rebreather divers were the second wave of a group of four. 
They waited in the dive boat for about ninety minutes whilst the 
first pair were in the water. The air temperature was 37 deg C, 
the humidity was high but they were in shade. Their dive plan 
was 35m for 90 min which they carried out with 60 min bottom 
time followed by a slow ascent over 35 min of decompression. 
There was some current on the dive but no over-exertion and 
nothing else to give cause for concern. Having surfaced one of 
the divers stowed his kit and then jumped back into the water 
briefly to cool down. On reboarding the boat he pulled in his 
decompression cylinder from a boat line where he had placed it 
on finishing his dive to make entering the boat with his CCR unit 
easier. It was at this point that he felt himself go weak and he 
became unwell. He was quickly transferred to the shady area of 
the boat, laid down and put on oxygen, which was maintained for 
the whole of the two hour journey back to a marina and waiting 

 
 
  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
40  ©BSAC - 2013 
ambulance. During the journey the diver had a rapid heartbeat, 
shallow breathing, some skin rash, grey and cold skin, very mild 
double vision, extreme fatigue and he felt nauseous. On arrival 
at the marina the diver was attended to by paramedics and 
transferred by ambulance to hospital and then to a hyperbaric 
chamber where he received recompression treatment. He was 
kept under observation in hospital overnight and released the 
following morning with some residual symptoms which 
disappeared over the next couple of days. The diver has been 
using an air diluent and a set point of 1.3 bar. 
 
 
Illness / Injury 
April 2013 13/050 
A diver on a dive trip abroad became faint and was dry retching 
on a RHIB whilst waiting to dive. It was accepted that the diver 
had been kitted up in her drysuit and BCD for a prolonged period 
of time. The general principal at this location is that a diver 
should not be fully kitted for a period in excess of twenty minutes 
due to concerns of over-heating and effects of circulation 
restriction. The diver was returned to shore and de-kitted and 
although oxygen was being sourced it was clear the problem was 
over-heating and circulation restriction which had led to the 
fainting spell. The diver was taken to a medical centre and when 
the oxygen arrived she was given a little to help clear her head 
and then took on fluids. Within about thirty minutes the diver 
appeared to be much better and when checked later that 
evening she seemed fully recovered. She was monitored over 
the rest of the trip but there were no repercussions. 
May 2013 13/197 
A diver reported that he had a headache approximately ninety 
minutes after surfacing from a 10m dive for 37 min. The air 
temperature was 30 deg C and the sea temperature 20 deg C. 
The diver accepted he might be dehydrated and began to take in 
fluid immediately. It was recommended he see a doctor who 
agreed he was suffering from dehydration. 
May 2013 13/196 
A diver reported that he had a blocked feeling in his ear which he 
had experienced all night. He had carried out one dive the day 
before to 6m for 55 min. He was advised not to dive and to seek 
medical advice. 
June 2013 13/207 
It had been noticed that a trainee diver had some minor 
congestion but had been able to clear his ears and dive on the 
previous day of a training course. The following day the diver's 
congestion had worsened and he was showing signs of a chest 
cough. The diver was stopped from continuing his training. 
June 2013 13/208 
Following a dive to 10m for 29 min a trainee diver surfaced with 
blood and mucus in his mask. During the surface interval he 
became more congested and therefore refrained from further 
training 
June 2013 13/210 
On descending for the first training dive of the day a diver could 
not clear his ears and aborted the dive. He refrained from further 
diving due to pain and congestion. 
 
June 2013 13/199 
A diver reported discomfort in his ear after surfacing from the 
second dive of the day.  He sought medical assistance and it 
was confirmed that he had an inflammation in his ear canal. He 
was told to stop diving for two days. 
July 2013 13/206 
Following a one hour training session in a pool, a trainee was 
unable to clear his ears. He stopped training and had no further 
pain or problems. 
July 2013 13/204 
A trainee diver indicated he was not fit to dive during a dive brief. 
He complained of ear ache so was sent to a medical facility 
where he was informed he had an ear infection. The diver was 
advised not to dive or swim for a week. 
August 2013 13/217 
During a dive to a maximum depth of 17m a diver could not 
breathe from his regulator and started to panic. The dive guide 
made contact with him and provided an octopus regulator for the 
diver to breathe from. The pair made a faster than normal ascent 
to the anchor line at a depth of 6m and then a normal ascent to 
the surface. On recovery into the boat the diver was coughing 
and complained of a slight discomfort around his chest but no 
other symptoms. The diver was advised to attend hospital for a 
medical check up and attended a local clinic where he was 
advised to go for an x-ray. The diver returned to the dive centre a 
few days later reporting everything was alright. The regulator 
was checked and found to be working properly. 
August 2013 13/218 
A diver completed a dive to a maximum depth of 24m and a total 
duration of 49 min. Approximately three and a half hours after 
surfacing the diver contacted the dive centre saying he thought 
he was suffering from DCI. The diver was advised that this was 
unlikely given the profile followed on the dive but he was advised 
to attend the local hospital. The dive guide downloaded a copy of 
his computer profile for the hospital but on arrival he was advised 
that the diver had been airlifted by helicopter to a recompression 
chamber, where he received a three hour recompression 
treatment. It was subsequently reported that whilst at hospital 
waiting for helicopter transport, the diver's heart stopped but he 
was successfully resuscitated. The diver was reported to have a 
pre-existing heart condition for which he was taking medication 
but he had not disclosed this to the dive centre. The diver has 
been advised not to dive for six months and to consult a doctor 
before returning to diving. 
 
 
Boating and Surface 
January 2013 13/034 
A pair of divers went missing during a boat dive. A rescue boat 
searched the area and additional craft including a police launch 
and local fishing boats were called upon to assist. The divers 
were recovered unharmed. Towards the end of their agreed dive 
time they had been caught in a down current and had struggled 
to maintain their depth but had made decompression stops at 12, 
9 and 6m.  When they surfaced the current had pulled them 
nearly 1,000m away from the dive site. They deployed a DSMB 
as an additional aid for the searchers as well as waving, shouting 
and using torches to attract attention. 
 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   41 
March 2013 13/219 
A RHIB, which had previously failed to start and was involved in 
incident 13/036, had been recovered and checked and 
supposedly working and able to take two groups, one with six 
divers and a boat handler, the second with seven or eight divers 
and a boathandler. There was significant swell on the site but the 
divers from the first boat completed their dive with no incident. 
The RHIB was tied onto a buoyed shotline and when the six 
divers got back onboard there were two other divers from the 
second boat already onboard. The divers were told the other 
RHIB had broken down again and rather than returning to the 
liveaboard and then returning for the rest of the second group 
they would wait for the remaining divers to surface. When they 
surfaced the divers said they would prefer to wait on the line for 
the RHIB to return and pick them up. However, the dive guide 
was insistent they de-kit and board the RHIB. There were now 
thirteen or fourteen divers, their kit and the boat handler in the 
one RHIB. The boat was untied from the buoy but in the rough 
conditions the boat began filling with water and quickly became 
swamped, the engine submerged and would not start. The guide 
said all would have to jump out of the boat and most of the divers 
managed to grab their fins, some also had masks. The divers 
were told to swim away from the reef but the wind and waves 
were too strong and swept the divers towards the reef and the 
breakers. Losing masks and being hit by wave after wave was 
exhausting the divers but fortunately they were swept over and 
onto the reef and out of the breakers. The RHIB had been swept 
onto the reef so all the divers swam to it, hung on for a rest and 
eventually having taken their kit off the boat, swam with inflated 
jackets back to the liveaboard. 
March 2013 13/036 
A group of divers were diving an offshore reef in rough sea 
conditions when the engine of one of the two RHIBs involved in 
picking up divers stalled and would not start. The waves and 
wind pushed the RHIB towards the reef and breaking waves. The 
boat was flipped over tipping all the divers and kit overboard. 
The same RHIBS were involved in Incident no. 13/219. 
 
 
Ascents 
December 2012 13/018 
At the end of a navigation exercise on the second dive of the 
day, an instructor and his dive leader trainee were lifting the 
shotweight. The trainee dive leader attached his DSMB to the 
shotweight but upon inflation it became detached and went to the 
surface. The instructor attached his own DSMB and began a 
controlled lift when the trainee indicated he was out of air and 
switched to his pony and then shot up towards the surface. The 
instructor continued the lift of the shotweight with a faster than 
normal ascent. At 3m with ascent warnings on his computer he 
made a 3 min stop during which he could see the trainee on the 
surface with a lot of line around him, the instructor then 
continued to surface. Both divers were recovered into a boat and 
as the instructor had missed around 10 min of decompression 
stops and the trainee had made a fast ascent, both were put on 
oxygen for twenty minutes and observed for some time 
afterwards but no signs or symptoms were evident. 
March 2013 13/035 
A dive group ascended to complete their dive at shallower 
depths on a reef. One of the divers was buddied with the dive 
guide due to concerns earlier in the dive regarding his diving 
skills. One moment the diver was with the dive guide and next he 
was on the surface. The dive guide surfaced and found the 
casualty partially conscious, blue and bleeding from the mouth. 
The casualty advised the dive guide that he had held his breath 
on ascent. He was recovered to the dive boat and given oxygen 
initially in the recovery position, raised to a sitting position and 
then a lying position as his condition improved. However, the 
casualty was having breathing difficulties and coughing 
repeatedly. Another diver, who was also a doctor, suspected 
lung damage due to the ascent. The dive boat rendezvoused 
with a helicopter which took the casualty to hospital. At the 
hospital x-rays showed the casualty had water on his lungs and 
tests revealed that he had had a heart attack. 
March 2013 13/195 
Two divers were carrying out a planned no stop dive on a wreck. 
The plan was a maximum depth of 32m for 40 min with a 6m 
safety stop for 3 min. Both divers were using dive computers 
supplied by their club. At approximately 27m the 'No-Deco-Time' 
was misread as 7 min when it was actually showing an ascent 
time of 7 min and a ceiling of 3m. The divers began their ascent 
and carried out their planned 3 min safety stop at 6m. Once the 3 
min had elapsed it was noticed the computers still showed 'Stop 
time'. The divers made a decision to surface at which point both 
computers issued alarms. The divers exited the water and 
reported to the dive manager saying their computers had given 
them audio alarms during the dive and when surfacing from their 
3 min safety stop. Both computers were displaying an 'Error 
code' and a 'No-Fly' time of approximately forty-seven hours. A 
decision was made to abort the next planned dive. When 
investigating the computer downloads it indicated both divers 
had gone into mandatory decompression approximately 22 min 
into the dive and had made a normal ascent to the planned 6m 
safety stop. A recompression facility was contacted and details 
given on the dive and two dives from the day before. A decision 
was made for the divers to refrain from diving for a minimum 
period of twenty-four hours and to keep them under observation 
for any signs of DCI. 
March 2013 13/215 
A pair of divers prepared to dive as part of a larger escorted 
group on the first day of a diving holiday. Both divers had 
completed an accelerated decompression course the previous 
year but one had not practised with a twin-set configuration and 
decompression stage cylinder in the sea since the course.  He 
had done one dive at an inland site prior to the trip. Both divers 
did a weight check on the surface and appeared adequately 
weighted but the diver with less experience of the configuration 
insisted on adding more weight before descending. The guide 
led the group to the top of a wreck at 20m and checked that the 
whole group was fine. The guide then led the group along the 
side of the wreck. As the pair reached a depth of 35m the less 
experienced diver made signals to another diver in the group. 
The other diver did not understand the signals nor why he was 
not signalling his buddy but from conversations afterwards it 
appears he was asking for his torch to be put into his BCD 
pocket. The dive continued and after approximately 10 min the 
group were at a depth of 30m when the diver attempted to put 
his torch into his pocket.  At this point his feet became buoyant, 
he was unable to right himself and he made a buoyant ascent to 
the surface. During the ascent he was eventually able to right 
himself and slow his ascent slightly but he ascended directly to 
the surface. The diver did not have any required decompression 
stops. The diver was recovered into the cover boat and placed 
on oxygen but did not exhibit any signs of DCI. The rest of the 
group surfaced after a normal ascent and completion of safety 
stops. The group returned to shore and the diver remained on 
oxygen as a precaution and was monitored but displayed no 
symptoms. He resumed diving after a twenty-four hour break but 
avoided deeper diving for the remainder of the week. 
 
 
 

 
 
  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
42  ©BSAC - 2013 
Technique 
February 2013 13/194 
A dive manager recorded the information for a pre-planned dive 
in two waves, one comprising seven divers and the other four 
divers. The dive plan for the first wave was 30m for 30 min and 
for wave two 35m for 30 min. To avoid confusion the dive 
manager prepared two dive slates for each wave to define each 
dive plan. When the first wave surfaced the dive manager 
realised that he had mixed the two plans round inadvertently 
putting the seven divers in to a maximum depth of 35m. None of 
the divers had any problems. 
June 2013 13/209 
Following a dive to 8m for 35 min a diver reported to the dive 
manager that he had missed his safety stop. Examining his 
computer it was found that it had not switched into safety stop 
mode because the diver had spent 95% of his dive shallower 
that 6m. 
June 2013 13/104 
Three divers were descending a shotline to dive the top of a 
wreck between 18 to 20m. One of the divers was very 
inexperienced, it was her first dive of the season, using a new 
regulator and wearing a dive computer for the first time. The 
inexperienced diver was briefed to remain between the two other 
experienced divers, one of whom was leading the dive. At about 
10m the inexperienced diver called a halt to the descent as she 
was having trouble clearing her ears. With both the experienced 
divers close at hand, the inexperienced diver continued to try 
and clear her ears but one of the divers realised she was in 
some distress and appeared to be having trouble breathing. The 
diver released his alternate source as a precaution. Within 
moments the inexperienced diver gave the out of air signal and 
the diver presented his AS, took hold of her BCD shoulder strap 
and commenced an AS ascent assisted by the other diver. On 
the surface and assuming the diver had experienced a regulator 
malfunction, she was instructed to orally inflate her BCD but the 
dive leader tested her regulator and inflated her BCD using the 
direct feed. The divers were recovered to the dive boat and later 
the equipment was tested and found to be working properly. It 
was concluded that the inexperienced diver had suffered a panic 
attack. Later, the diver successfully completed a shallow dive to 
10m. 
July 2013 13/190 
An instructor, who was the designated rescue diver, was diving 
with another instructor and a trainee diver. The rescue diver 
became separated from the instructor and trainee when the SMB 
she was using became entangled in the shotline. The rescue 
diver tried to recall the other instructor and trainee by banging 
metal on metal underwater but without success. Meanwhile, the 
instructor with the trainee had deployed a DSMB and they both 
completed the dive safely. 
August 2013 13/213 
A nitrox diver dived a 40m wreck spending approximately 20 min 
on the wreck and approximately 30 min ascending. He 
completed a safety stop at 3m. He thought he had stayed at the 
safety stop long enough but when he surfaced his computer had 
gone into alarm mode. The diver was put on oxygen as a 
precaution. 
 
 
 
 
Equipment 
February 2013 13/031 
On the third and last dive of the day and beginning a gradual 
ascent up a reef wall, a diver inverted to take a photograph and 
his regulator appeared to miss one cycle of his regular breathing 
pattern. A normal air supply returned as he became upright. 
Ascending further and with 80 bar reading from his gauge he 
inverted again to take a photograph. When he became upright 
he was having difficulty breathing any air from either his main 
regulator or octopus, managing about three breaths with 
difficulty. His gauge showed 70 bar and then fell instantly to 0 
bar. He finned towards his buddy and took his AS.  They 
ascended to 7m before the dive leader slowed the ascent to the 
surface. There were no signs of any free flow or loss of air from 
the diver's cylinders or regulators. Following the dive, the diver 
detached his rig from the cylinder and found a soapy substance 
around the filter on the first stage. When he connected another 
rig it confirmed there was still 70 bar pressure in the cylinder. 
The primary regulator was serviced the following day and the 
pressure gauge, which was not changed, read accurately for the 
following dives. 
June 2013 13/198 
A diver surfaced from a dive on a training course. On de-kitting 
and passing his equipment up into the boat it was noticed that he 
lost an integrated weight pouch. 
June 2013 13/200 
A diver entered the water on a planned 20m dive but 
experienced a free flow from her octopus. It took some time to 
resolve the problem resulting in the diver losing approximately 80 
bar from her cylinder. The dive plan was adjusted and the dive 
continued but at a shallower depth. 
June 2013 13/112 
Two divers were on a diving holiday and felt the safety brief 
onboard the dive boat extremely poor. They requested further 
information but this was limited to life vests, fire extinguishers 
and muster point. Nothing was given on transfer between the 
main liveaboard boat and dive tender, life rafts (not seen 
onboard), oxygen kits and operation. On the first day of diving, a 
Sunday, a check out dive was made. One of the divers tested 
the air in his and his buddy's cylinder on the tender boat and 
both were contaminated with poisonous levels of carbon 
monoxide. Having brought this to the attention of the dive guide 
the diver was requested to test more cylinders. Only one out of 
ten was within EN 12021 limits, the remaining nine contained 
elevated levels of carbon monoxide. The dive was cancelled and 
the dive guide asked the diver to carry out some further testing 
on the compressors. Low carbon monoxide levels confirmed that 
any fumes from the adjacent liveaboard were not the problem. 
The readings changed dramatically when the compressors were 
started. Measurements of the air flow directly from the fill whips 
showed high contaminations levels as well as measurements at 
the air intake. The dive guide indicated they would replace the 
filters but the diver warned that doing so would be unlikely to 
resolve the problems. The air intake lines were modified. On the 
Monday, three dives were made and the carbon monoxide levels 
appeared within EN12021 as far as these were measured. No 
clear briefing was given by the dive staff that they now had an 
analyser available for guests nor an explanation or 
demonstration on how it should be used which resulted in many 
divers taking short readings well below the response time of the 
analyser. Despite the poisoned fills on the Sunday and the 
presence of the analyser brought onboard by the operator, on 
the Tuesday morning before the first dive, three cylinders 
analysed by the diver again contained elevated carbon monoxide 
levels as well as cylinders tested by others. Six or seven 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   43 
cylinders were not right but many cylinders were not tested. 
Rejected cylinders were exchanged for others that tested low 
and the dive was made. The diver and his buddy skipped the 
remaining three dives for that day. On the Wednesday, some 
cylinders tested were correct, some had slightly elevated levels 
and occasionally a cylinder would test outside the EN standard. 
During the dives it was noted that several cylinders were leaking, 
mostly from the valve to cylinder connections but also one from a 
valve's burst disc. On the Thursday morning before the first dive, 
the divers were informed that one of the two compressors had 
broken down. On the Friday evening the divers were informed 
that the second compressor had broken down. The divers' 
concern will always remain as to what would have happened if 
they had not carried a carbon monoxide analyser themselves 
and they were left with no confidence in the dive operator. 
June 2013 13/201 
Three divers surfaced from a 22m 30 min wreck dive and 
commented on a strange taste to their diving gas. None of the 
divers complained of any ill effects. The filling station was 
informed and a cylinder test was found to be free of 
contamination. 
August 2013 13/216 
A rebreather diver and his buddy conducted the second dive of 
the day on a wreck to a maximum depth of 54m.  They were 
guided to view an aircraft off the stern of the main wreckage, 
which the guide had some difficulty locating. As a result of the 
depth and the time taken the rebreather diver had accumulated 
approximately 30 min of required decompression. The rebreather 
diver swam quickly back to the shotline on the main wreck at a 
depth of 26m and then rolled onto his side to check for his buddy 
who was in fact close by but on the opposite side to the direction 
he had turned. As the diver rolled back he breathed in but got a 
mouthful of water. The diver bailed out onto his off board 11 lt air 
cylinder. The diver then discovered that the mouthpiece had 
become detached from his rebreather hose and he was holding it 
in his hand having removed it when fitting his bailout regulator. 
The diver was able to refit the mouthpiece to his rebreather and 
then switch back to breathing from the unit which was working 
effectively. On ascending to a depth of 12m the divers needed to 
swim horizontally to a decompression station suspended from 
the stern of the support boat. The diver decided to switch back to 
his bailout cylinder in case the mouthpiece became detached 
again during this swim. Once securely on the deco station the 
diver switched back to his rebreather and completed his stops 
without further incident. On surfacing the diver found 
approximately 1cm of water collected in the bottom of the 
scrubber unit of the rebreather. The diver had changed the 
rebreather mouthpiece three days previously with a genuine 
manufacturer's spare and tie wrapped it in place. 
September 2013 13/205 
Two divers were setting up their kit preparing for a shore dive 
and noticed that the air in their cylinders smelled abnormal. The 
dive manager was alerted and other divers in the group told to 
stop preparing for the dive until their cylinders were tested. With 
other cylinders also identified as having bad air, smell and 
carbon monoxide, the compressor operators were immediately 
notified and all filling ceased. The compressor was to be 
serviced with air purity tests to be carried out when completed. 
September 2013 13/211 
On the fifth dive of a week's holiday on a liveaboard a diver and 
his buddy descended to 27m with the plan to ascend a reef wall. 
Approximately 5 min into the dive, the diver decided to check out 
his octopus regulator which had been recently serviced but had 
only been used in a pool. As he took hold of the hose in one 
hand and the regulator in the other there was a very loud 'crack'. 
The diver found that although still holding onto the hose and 
regulator, they had completely separated with bubbles flying out 
of the hose. He let go of the hose which resulted in it spinning 
around his head 'like a helicopter blade'. The diver remembers 
checking his computer which read 24m, looking up and seeing 
bubbles, the hose circling his head and thinking the surface was 
in reach. Looking around he could not see his buddy, who was in 
fact coming towards him very fast with his octopus outstretched. 
The diver made the decision, he was at a reasonable depth, his 
air was going to run out so he would go for the surface. He gave 
a gentle but firm squirt of air into his BCD and ascended, venting 
from his BCD and watching his computer all the time. He was 
taking it as slowly as he could with the thought of running out of 
air focusing his mind and being prepared to breathe out on the 
last few metres of the ascent.. At 9m the dive guide raced across 
from the group he was with, caught the diver and offered his 
octopus which the diver took. The guide turned off the cylinder 
and they both settled at 6m. OK signals were exchanged and 
between them they put the regulator back together. The swivel 
had become unscrewed between the hose and the swivel 
connector on the second stage, which the diver was still holding 
in his hand. The guide turned the cylinder back on, the octopus 
was stowed and the diver's main regulator retrieved. The diver 
completed the dive with no ill effects. 
 
 
Miscellaneous 
February 2013 13/193 
A group of divers were using a large rock platform as an exit 
point from diving a tunnel and cave site. One of the natural 
features near the exit point was a blow hole. A diver was exiting 
the water onto the rock platform and as he stood up a wave 
washed over the platform taking him backwards and into the 
blow hole. As the diver still had his regulator in and mask on he 
was able to breathe but as he went through the hole his 
mouthpiece was ripped off and damaged. He changed to his 
alternate air source and swam back up the hole to the surface 
where he was helped out of the water by his buddy and another 
diver. During recovery of the first diver another diver slipped over 
the blow hole when another wave washed over the platform. He 
also had his regulator in and mask on but did not fall into the 
hole as he had spread his body to stop himself going down and 
was helped up out of the water. 
 
 
 

 
 
  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
44  ©BSAC - 2013 
INCIDENT REPORTS 
 
If you would like to add to, correct or place a different interpretation upon any of the incidents in this report please put your 
comments in writing and send them to the following address: 
     The Incidents Advisor,  
     The British Sub-Aqua Club,  
     Telford's Quay,  
     South Pier Road, 
Ellesmere Port,  
     Cheshire,  
     CH65 4FL. 
 
For new incidents please complete a BSAC incident report form and send it to BSAC HQ at the address shown above.   
 
All  personal details are treated as confidential.  
 
Incident Report Forms can be obtained free of charge from the BSAC Internet website 
http://www.bsac.com/incidentreporting 
or by phoning BSAC HQ on 0151  350 6200 
 
 
Numerical & Statistical Analyses 
 
Statistical Summary of Incidents 
 
 
 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Incidents Reported 439 465 453 409 498 499 437 401 416 453 412 405 377 335
Incidents Analysed 417 458 432 392 445 474 418 377 381 409 393 392 346 311
UK Incidents 384 433 414 366 423 441 379 349 359 381 364 375 314 263
Overseas Incidents 33 25 18 26 22 33 39 28 22 28 29 17 32 48
Unknown Locations 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
UK Incident - BSAC Members 113 122 149 162 154 160 148 120 129 120 116 193 133 104
UK Incident - Non-BSAC Members 52 94 55 74 72 65 50 61 65 29 30 94 40 38
UK Incident - Membership Unknown 219 217 211 130 197 216 181 168 165 232 218 88 141 121
 
 
 
UK Incident  Report Source Analysis 
 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
Total Reports: 405
Total Incidents: 263
Other
Media
RNLI
Coastguard
BSAC Reports
 

 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013    
?BSAC - 2013   45 
 
 
 
History of UK Diving Fatalities 
 
  Number of Fatalities 
 
Year 
 
Membership BSAC Non-BSAC 
1965 6,813 3 - 
1966 7,979 1 4 
1967 8,350 1 6 
1968 9,241 2 1 
1969 11,299 2 8 
1970 13,721 4 4 
1971 14,898 0 4 
1972 17,041 10 31 
1973 19,332 9 20 
1974 22,150 3 11 
1975 23,204 2 - 
1976 25,310 4 - 
1977 25,342 3 - 
1978 27,510 8 4 
1979 30,579 5 8 
1980 24,900 6 7 
1981 27,834 5 7 
1982 29,590 6 3 
1983 32,177 7 2 
1984 32,950 8 5 
1985 34,861 8 6 
1986 34,210 6 9 
1987 34,500 6 2 
1988 32,960 10 6 
1989 34,422 4 8 
1990 36,434 3 6 
1991 43,475 8 9 
1992 45,626 9 8 
1993 50,722 3 6 
1994 50,505 6 6 
1995 52,364 9 9 
1996 48,920 7 9 
1997 48,412 4 12 
1998 46,712 6 16 
1999 46,682 8 8 * 
2000 41,692 6 11 
2001 41,272 9 13 
2002 39,960 4 10 
2003 38,340 5 6 
2004 37,153 6 19 
2005 37,185 5 12 
2006 35,422 4 12 
2007 34,857 7 5 
2008 34,325 6 4 
2009 32,790 7 7 
2010 32,229 8 9 
2011 30,909 4 7 
2012 29,632 10 7 
2013 28,728 5 9 
 
 
Note 
*  1999 Figure corrected from 9 to 8 due to a double count discovered in 2010

 
 
  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2013 
46  ©BSAC - 2013 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THIS AND PREVIOUS INCIDENT REPORTS 
AS  Alternative source (gas or air) 
AAS  Alternative air (gas) source 
A&E  Accident and emergency department at hospital 
AED  Automated external defibrillator 
ARCC(K)  Aeronautical rescue coordination centre (Kinloss) 
ARI  Aberdeen Royal Infirmary (Scotland, UK) 
AV  Artificial ventilation 
AWLB  All weather lifeboat 
BCD  Buoyancy compensation device (e.g. stab jacket) 
BOV  Bailout valve 
CAGE  Cerebral arterial gas embolism 
CG  Coastguard 
CCR  Closed circuit rebreather 
CNS  Central nervous system 
CPR  Cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
CRT  Coastguard rescue team 
DCI  Decompression illness 
DDMO  Duty diving medical officer 
DDRC  Diving Diseases Research Centre (Plymouth, UK) 
DSC  Digital selective calling (emergency radio signal) 
DSMB  Delayed surface marker buoy 
DPV  Diver propulsion vehicle 
ECG  Electrocardiogram 
ENT  Ear, nose and throat 
EPIRB  Emergency position indicating radio beacon 
FAWGI  False alarm with good intent 
FRS  Fire and rescue service 
GP  General practitioner (doctor) 
GPS  Global positioning system 
Helo  Helicopter 
HLS  Helicopter landing site 
HMCG  Her Majesty’s Coastguard 
HUD  Head up display 
ILB  Inshore lifeboat 
INM  Institute of Naval Medicine  
IV  Intravenous 
LB  Lifeboat 
MCA  Maritime & Coastguard Agency 
m   Metre 
min  Minute(s) 
MOD  Maximum operating depth 
MOP  Member of the public 
MRCC  Maritime rescue coordination centre 
MRSC  Maritime rescue sub centre 
MV  Motor vessel 
NCI  National Coastwatch Institute 
PFO  Patent foramen ovale 
PLB  Personal locator beacon 
POB  Persons on board 
QAH  Queen Alexandra Hospital (Portsmouth, UK) 
QAB  Queen Anne Battery  (Plymouth, UK) 
RAF  Royal Air Force 
RHIB  Rigid hull inflatable boat 
RMB  Royal Marines base 
RN  Royal Navy 
RNLI  Royal National Lifeboat Institution 
ROV  Remotely operated vehicle 
SAR  Search and rescue 
SARIS/SARSYS  Search and rescue information system 
SMB  Surface marker buoy 
SRR  Search and rescue region 
SRU  Search and rescue unit 
UTC  Coordinated universal time 
VLB  Volunteer life brigade 
999  UK emergency phone number 
 

