Published by The British Sub-Aqua Club in the interests of diving safety  
 
The British Sub-Aqua Club 
 
 
 
 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report  
2001 
 
 
Compiled by 
 
Brian Cumming 
 
Diving Safety and Incidents Advisor 
 

 ` NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001 
 
Introduction 
 
This booklet contains the year 2001 Diving Incidents Report, produced by The British Sub-Aqua Club  (BSAC) in 
the interest of promoting diving safety.  It is important to note that it contains details of UK diving incidents 
occurring to divers of all affiliations, plus incidents occurring worldwide involving BSAC members.  
 
Report Format 
The majority of statistical information contained within this report is also shown in graphical form.  Please note that all 
statistical information is produced from UK data only and does not include Overseas Incidents unless noted as ëAll 
Incidentsí. 
 
The contents of this report are split into an overview of the year, and then the details of nine incident categories plus 
some historical analyses.  The various sections can be found as shown below:- 
 
 i) Overview Page  1 
 ii) Fatalities Page 5 
 iii) Decompression Incidents Page  9 
 iv) Injury / illness Page  17 
 v) Boating & Surface Incidents Page  22 
 vi) Ascent Problems Page  29 
 vii) Technique Problems Page  34 
 viii) Equipment Problems Page  36 
 ix) Miscellaneous Incidents Page  37 
 x) Overseas Incidents Page  38 
 xi) Numerical & Statistical Analyses Page  41 
 xii) List of Abbreviations Page  43 
 
 
Within each category the incidents are listed in the order of their occurrence, not necessarily that of Incident Reference.  
They are laid out in the following form: 
 
  MONTH/YR OF INCIDENT  INCIDENT REF.    
  Brief Narrative of Incident.................................................................................... 
  ........................................................................................................ 
 
The nature of many diving incidents is such that there is usually more than one cause or effect.  Where this is the case 
the incident has been classified under the more appropriate cause or effect. For instance an incident involving a fast 
ascent, causing decompression illness, will be classified under 'Decompression Incidents'. 
 
Brian Cumming, 
BSAC Diving Incidents Advisor, 
October 2001 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
Data for this report are collected from several different sources.  I would like to extend my thanks and appreciation to the 
following for their assistance in its production and in ensuring its completeness: 
 
 Jo Dilly, Coastguard Sport Diving Liaison Officer 
  Peter Bradley, Sea Safety Liaison Officer, Royal National Lifeboat Institution 
and, in particular, all of those divers and other sources who have taken the 
trouble to complete Incident Reports and share their learning experience with 
others. 
 
Finally, to Dr. Yvonne Couch for proof reading this report 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
©BS-AC - 2001    1 
Overview 
 
has seen a continued rise in the total number of 
incidents that have been reported.  In the 2001 
incident year (October 00 to September 01 
inclusive) 458 incidents have been analysed, compared with 417 
in 2000, and 382 in 1999. 
The incidents database was closed two weeks earlier this year 
than is normal in order to meet the earlier timing of the Diving 
Officers Conference.  The effect of this will have been to reduce 
the number of incidents recorded in the year due to the delay in 
reports being processed.  It is estimated that a further 25 incidents 
would have been recorded if the database had been closed at the 
same time as in previous years.  Thus it can be estimated that the 
number of incidents reported has grown by about 25% over the 
last two years.  This does not necessarily mean that more 
incidents are taking place.  Our data capture has certainly 
improved and the wider publication of the report will have 
increased diversí awareness and this is likely to have encouraged 
the reporting of more incidents.  
We can be very sure that we record all UK incidents involving a 
fatality since these are high profile events involving the emergency 
services.  Information from these sources, together with that 
provided by our members, coaches, and press articles, ensures 
that we are alerted to all UK diving deaths. 
We can be equally sure that we do not have a full record of all of 
the other types of incident.  If the emergency services are not 
involved and if those involved do not send in details of an incident 
then it will go unrecorded.  It is impossible to assess just how 
many incidents are unrecorded but it must be a significant 
number.  Thus, apart from the fatalities, this report should be 
treated as a sample of the types of problems that divers 
encounter, not a definitive record. 
  
The distribution of these reports is shown in the following chart.  
As can be seen, 66% of these incidents have occurred in the 
summer period.  This is totally consistent with previous years, 
reflecting the increased number of dives that take place during the 
warmer weather. 
 
 
 
Monthly breakdown of all incidents - 2001 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
 
 
Incidents by category 
The incident database categorises all incidents into one of nine 
major categories, and the following chart shows the distribution of 
the 2001 incidents into those categories.  
 
 
Categorisation of the yearís incidents 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Overseas
Miscellaneous
Equipment
Technique
Fatalities
Injury / Illness
Ascents
DCI
Boat / surface
This chart indicates 21 incidents involving fatalities, one of which 
was a double fatality. 
 
 
The highest number of incidents relates to ëBoating and Surfaceí 
incidents, and this is consistent with previous years, apart from 
last year. 
The second highest category of incident relates to Decompression 
Illness (DCI).  Last year saw DCI incidents move into the top 
position; this year it returns to its normal position of the second 
most common type of incident.   
Last year the number of ëBoating and Surfaceí incidents was 15% 
lower than normal and the number of DCI incidents was 25% 
higher than normal.  This year both of these categories are in line 
with their previous norms. 
 
Last year a 20% reduction in the number of lost divers was 
identified.  These incidents typically involve divers who, upon 
surfacing at the end of their dive, find themselves out of contact 
with their boat, and very often a long and expensive search takes 
place, almost always successfully.  This year sees that trend 
continue, with the number of lost divers being 35% lower than 
2000 and 50% lower than 1999.  This subject has been 
highlighted in many previous reports and presentations on diving 
statistics, and it is hoped that this is a real trend indicating that 
divers and dive marshals are taking more care with this issue. 
Engine failure, however, shows a marked increase.  71 cases are 
reported, a 36% increase from last year, the highest number ever. 
 
Fatalities 
2001 has been a very bad year for fatal incidents.  There have 
been 22 UK fatalities of which 9 involved BSAC members.   
The average number of BSAC UK fatalities over the previous 10 
years was 6.3, so the 2001 figure represents a 43% increase. 
The average number of non-BSAC UK fatalities over the same 
period was 9.  The 13 non-BSAC fatalities in 2001 represents a 
similar increase. 
There is no obvious cause for this increase.  An analysis of the 
factors involved does not show any new trends; the nature of 
these incidents is in line with previous years, there has just been 
more of them.   
The causal factors behind the UK fatalities can be summarised as 
follows:- 
∑ One case involved a diver who suffered a heart attack whilst 
under water. 
∑ Five cases involved deep dives.  
2001 

 ` NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001 
2        ©BS-AC - 2001 
One of these cases involved a double fatality where a diver 
got into difficulties and a second diver, who went to assist, 
also failed to return. 
One case involved a diver, using a rebreather, who dived 
alone to 120m. 
∑ Two other cases involving rebreather divers occurred when 
they became separated from their buddies during the ascent 
from a dive.  In both cases the divers did not surface and, 
despite searches, were not found.   
∑ Three cases involved divers who found themselves in rough 
water.  One was thrown against rocks and two others 
succumbed to the effects of large waves. 
∑ Three cases involved divers who had run out of air (one of 
these is also included in the above ërough waterí group). 
∑ One case involved a diver who was diving solo from the 
shore and his loss was not realised until the following day. 
∑ One case involved a diver who removed his cylinder to enter 
a wreck, and became trapped. 
∑ One case involved a trainee diver who inhaled water, spat 
out her mouthpiece and lost consciousness under water. 
∑ One case involved a person who was diving without a 
weightbelt and made a rapid ascent from 46m. 
 
  
This leaves five remaining cases where there is simply insufficient 
information to draw any conclusions with respect to the causes.  
All involved divers who got into difficulties whilst conducting 
apparently normal dives and, although they were recovered from 
the water, failed to survive.  It is possible that these incidents 
include other cases of  divers becoming seriously ill whilst 
underwater (e.g. heart attack) but this is not yet known.  
   
Rebreathers are involved in four of the fatalities, and the report 
contains four other, non-fatal, rebreather related incidents.  Three 
of these involve divers who became hypoxic.  As you will read, 
unconsciousness follows swiftly and it is probably only the swift 
action of others that saved us from a further three fatalities.  A 
high level of training, practice and attention to detail is required 
when using all diving equipment ñ especially rebreathers. 
    
Incident depths 
The following chart shows the maximum depth of the dive during 
which incidents took place, summarised into depth range 
groupings. 
 
The pattern is very similar to that normally seen and reflects the 
amount of diving that takes place in these depth ranges.   
 
Depth continues to be a significant feature of diving incidents.  9 
of the reported incidents where the depth is known involve dives to 
over 50m, and, as reported above, 5 of these resulted in fatalities.  
8 of these incidents were in the 51 to 60m range and one incident 
involved a dive to 120m. 
 
The BSAC advises that no dive should be deeper than 50m, and 
that dives to 50m should only be conducted by divers who are 
appropriately trained and qualified.   
The recommended limit for divers trained to Sports Diver standard 
is 35m and then only when they have received appropriate training 
for diving at this depth. 
 
Maximum depth of dive involving an incident 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
>60m
51-60m
41-50m
31-40m
21-30m
11-20m
1-10m
Surf.
Unknown
  
The next chart shows the depth at which the incident started.  
Inevitably the data is biased towards the shallower depths since 
many incidents happen during the ascent or at the surface.  
Critical among these are the DCI cases where almost always the 
casualty is out of the water before any problems are noted.  This 
partially explains the large occurrence of ësurfaceí cases as this 
includes divers with DCI who have left the water. 
 
Depth at which an incident started 
 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
>60m
51-60m
41-50m
31-40m
21-30m
11-20m
1-10m
Surf.
Unknown
 
Other surface incidents involve boats and boating incidents.  
As reported earlier, incidents involving engine problems have 
increased dramatically over previous years. 
Inadequate maintenance is certain to be the cause of many of the 
engine problems.  Just over 50% of engine problems occurred in 
March, April and May, when the boats are probably being used for 
the first time after a winterís lay off.  It  seems divers are putting to 
sea in boats that are inadequately prepared.   
 
Saving money by avoiding an engine service can be a costly 
mistake.  Engine failure, with divers underwater, often results in 
lost divers since the boat is no longer able to recover them.  These 
divers are then left floating at the surface until discovered.  The 
search operation is often very extensive with lifeboats, other craft 
and helicopters deployed to find the missing divers.  
 
Diving boat owners are urged to plan an adequate engine service 
before they begin a new diving season. 
 Diver Qualifications 
The next two charts show the qualification of those BSAC 
members who were involved in reported incidents.    
 
Qualification of the divers involved in incidents 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
©BS-AC - 2001    3 
0 10 20 30 40 50
1st Class
Advanced
Dive Leader
Sports Diver
Club/Ocean
Novice
Snorkel
 
It is important to note that these divers were involved in the 
incident but this does not necessarily mean that they suffered the 
effects of it.  Some were involved as rescuers or in some other 
indirect way. 
 
 
Qualification of instructors involved in incidents 
0 10 20
National
Advanced
Open Water
Club
Assistant Club
Snorkel
Unknown
 
An analysis of incident by diver qualification shows that no grade 
of diver, from novice to instructor, is immune to problems.  It is all 
too easy to make the assumption that only inexperienced divers 
get into problems, but the chart shows that this is not so. 
Although the data suggest that divers at the level of Sports Diver 
are the most prone to problems one must be careful in the 
interpretation of these data.  The picture is clearly distorted by the 
numbers of members that we have at each of these grades.  It is 
very probable that the largest single group of members are Sports 
Divers, hence the high incidence of problems.   
 
The distribution of these qualification data conforms to the pattern 
seen in previous years. 
 
 
Diversí use of the Emergency Services 
Diversí use of the rescue services shows a monthly distribution 
aligned to the distribution of all incidents, and is clearly correlated 
with the number of dives that are taking place.  Our demands 
upon the Coastguard service were typical for the year, as were our 
calls upon the services of the RNLI.  
 
UK Incidents involving the Coastguard agency 
 - Monthly breakdown 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Incidents invovling HM Coastguard: 223
 
 
 
Diversí use of RNLI facilities by month 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Incidents involving Lifeboats: 120  
 
 
Diversí requirements for SAR helicopters is significantly down 
over previous years.  Our average call on helicopters in the last 
three years has been over 90, this year the number of incidents 
involving helicopters was 68, no doubt a welcome cost save for the 
emergency services.   
Helicopters are tasked to support the search for missing divers 
and to transport divers with DCI to recompression facilities.  As 
mentioned earlier, both of these categories of incidents are lower 
than in previous years, hence the reduced demand for helicopter 
support.   
 
 
Diversí use of SAR helicopters by month 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Incidents involving helicopters : 68  
Decompression Incidents 

 ` NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001 
4        ©BS-AC - 2001 
The BSAC database contains 106 reports of DCI incidents, some 
of which involved more than one casualty.  When these multiple 
cases are counted the result is 116 incidents of DCI. 
In 2000 there were 134 cases of DCI recorded and in 1999 the 
number was 86;  this year falls between the two.   
 
An analysis of the causal factors associated with these cases 
indicates the following:- 
42 involved diving to deeper than 30m 
34 involved rapid ascents 
19 involved missed decompression stops  
17 involved repeat diving 
Some cases involved more than one of these causes. 
 
The report includes several cases of ëDiver illnessí reported by the 
RNLI and whilst the nature of this illness is not recorded it is very 
likely that these are further cases of DCI. 
 
As reported many times before, poor buoyancy control is at the 
heart of the majority of these cases.  Divers are failing to correctly 
control their ascent, especially in the critical last 10m zone and 
ending up with rapid ascents and/or missed decompression stops.  
Very often the diver is using a drysuit and is unable to prevent a 
buoyant ascent. 
Better training is clearly indicated and Diving Officers, Training 
Officers and Instructors should work to ensure that the skills of 
their trainees are particularly well practised in this area. 
Several of the incidents involve divers using unfamiliar equipment 
and ending up with buoyancy problems.  It is important to 
familiarise oneself with new equipment in a safe environment prior 
to using it in more challenging circumstances. 
 
Whenever possible it is safest to ascend from the dive using a 
shotline; this will provide the diver with the opportunity to stop and 
correct a buoyancy problem before an uncontrolled  ascent and 
accompanying pressure reduction takes place; once a rapid 
ascent is underway it is very hard to stop. 
In Conclusion 
The 2001 incident year has been a very poor one from the 
perspective of UK fatalities.  22 deaths is equal only to 1998 and 
the highest number recorded in the last 25 years.  Fatalities of 
BSAC members is our highest for over 10 years, and fatalities of 
non-BSAC members is the second highest in over 25 years. 
 
An analysis of the data has not highlighted any major new 
concerns.  Most of the incidents reported within this document 
could have been avoided had those involved followed a few basic 
principles of safe diving practice.  Those that I would emphasise, 
as I have done before, are:- 
∑ Dive within your limits. 
∑ Build your experience gradually. 
∑ Practice the basic skills until you are faultless, and then 
keep in practice. 
∑ Plan and equip yourself correctly for the dive. 
∑ Maintain constant vigilance whilst involved in diving activities 
and be ready to act quickly as soon as things start to go 
astray.  
∑ Ensure that equipment is fully and correctly serviced (both 
diving and boating). 
 
Please read the detailed reports in this booklet carefully and use 
them to learn from othersí mistakes. They have had the courage 
and generosity to record their experiences for publication, the least 
that we can do is to use this information to avoid similar problems. 
 
Finally, if you must have an incident please report it on our 
Incident Report form, available free from BSAC HQ or via the 
BSAC Internet website.   
 
As always, your anonymity is assured ñ great care is taken to 
preserve the confidentiality of any personal information recorded in 
BSAC Incident Reports. 
 
 
 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC - 2001  5 
Fatalities 
 
October 2000 01/001 
Two divers conducted a wreck dive in a maximum depth of 51m.  
They descended the shotline and secured it to the wreck and then 
entered the wreck.  After 20 min one of the pair indicated that they 
should ascend.  The other diver returned the OK signal but did not 
follow.  The first diver returned to the wreck and signaled again 
through decking in the wreck, the other diver responded but did 
not leave the wreck.  After 35 min the first diver was low on air.  He 
deployed a delayed SMB and made his ascent.  He completed 
stops at 9m and 6m.  He ran out of air during a stop at 3m and he 
surfaced having missed 30 min of decompression stops.  At the 
surface he called for assistance, was recovered into the boat and 
placed on oxygen.  The emergency services were alerted.  Four 
lifeboats and an RN helicopter undertook a search but failed to 
locate the lost diver.  A further underwater search was made 7 
months later.  His body was finally recovered from the wreck, at a 
depth of 53m, by fellow divers, 10 months later. 
October 2000 01/002 
A diver using a drysuit descended with his buddy to a wreck in a 
depth of 46m.  The diver was diving without a weightbelt.  They 
rose to the top of the wreck where the diver without the weightbelt 
experienced buoyancy problems.  He hung inverted from the 
wreck.  His buddy tried to release air from the suit and to bring him 
upright.  His buddy tied him to the wreck and looked around for 
something to act as a weight.  He was unsuccessful and decided 
to try to use a reel and line to make a controlled ascent to the 
surface.  The buddy cut the line securing the buoyant diver to the 
wreck.  The buoyant diver then made a rapid ascent to the 
surface.  He ascended from 40m in 40 seconds.  He surfaced 
unconscious.  He was airlifted to hospital but attempts to revive 
him failed. 
October 2000 01/003 
An instructor and four students were participating in a dive using 
trimix.  They descended a shotline to a depth of 50m.  At this point 
one of the students attached a distance line and he and his buddy 
moved down to 54m.  The buddy did not like the low visibility 
conditions and they turned round to return.  At this point the first 
diver started to panic.  The instructor was with two other students 
at the bottom of the shotline and saw that there was a problem.  
He went to help.  He assisted the buddy back to the line but could 
not find the panicked diver.  He marshaled the group up the 
shotline to 42m and then re-descended to find the lost diver.  He 
discovered him at 59m, he was on his back and apparently not 
breathing.  He attempted to lift this diver but could not.  He 
attached the line to him and returned to the shotline.  He led the 
ascent including necessary decompression stops.  Once at the 
surface the alarm was raised.  The missing diver's body was later 
recovered by police divers. 
February 2001 01/078 
A student diver under training got into difficulties whilst ascending 
from a 7m dive.  He was recovered to the shore and first aid was 
administered.  He was airlifted to hospital where he was 
pronounced dead on arrival. 
 
February 2001 01/090 
The police were notified of a missing diver.  His vehicle was 
located near a dive site; it had been there since the previous day.  
Police and Coastguard attended the scene and conducted a 
search in conjunction with a lifeboat and a Navy helicopter.  The 
diver's body was recovered from the seabed.  It is believed that he 
had been diving alone. 
March 2001 01/092 
A group of trainee divers assembled at 6m and began an descent 
to 18m.  One of the group experienced an ear problem at 10m, an 
instructor waited with her.  She got to 14m but seemed nervous. 
The instructor took her to a cliff face to act as a reference point.  
The trainee is thought to have swallowed water which caused her 
to panic.  She spat out her regulator.  The instructor replaced it 
and purged it, but the trainee would not accept the regulator.  They 
were in mid water and sinking.  The instructor started an ascent 
and they got to 6m.  At that point the instructor lost her grip on the 
trainee and made a rapid ascent to the surface.  The trainee sank.  
A search was started and the trainee was found on a ledge at 7m 
some 10 - 15 min later.  Resuscitation techniques were applied 
and the trainee was taken to hospital.  She was kept on a life 
support machine for a week but failed to recover. 
March 2001 01/111 
Two divers had completed a night dive.  They were at the surface 
when they were hit by a big wave.  One of the pair managed to 
climb onto the rocks but the other struck his head on the rocks 
and is believed to have lost consciousness.  The Coastguard was 
alerted by shouts for assistance and a lifeboat was launched.  The 
lost diver was found.  Both were airlifted to hospital but the injured 
diver was pronounced dead on arrival.  (Coastguard report) 
 
 
 
 
UK Fatalities - Monthly breakdown  
from October 2000 to September 2001  incl. 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
 
 
April 2001 01/125 
A diver was nearing the end of his second dive of the day.  At 20m 
he showed his contents gauge to the dive leader; it showed 80 bar.  
They launched a delayed SMB and made a normal ascent to 6m 
where the diver was found to be low on air.  He took the dive 
leaderís alternative air source.  He sank a little but was recovered 
to the surface.  No decompression stops were required.  At the 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001 
6        ©BS-AC - 2001 
surface he complained that he could not breathe.  This condition 
was made worse by the swell and waves.  The buddy offered his 
alternative air source once again to assist the troubled diver.  This 
diver then lost consciousness.   He was recovered into the boat 
and resuscitation techniques were applied during the trip to the 
shore.  The casualty was taken by ambulance to hospital where he 
was declared dead on arrival.  The cause of death was reported as 
acute DCI 
April 2001 01/126 
A diver surfaced after a dive and was waiting at the surface to be 
collected by his boat.  He was engulfed by a wave and swept 
away.  He was later recovered into his boat and resuscitation 
techniques were applied.  He was airlifted to hospital where he 
was pronounced dead. 
April 2001 01/133 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 20m.  39 min 
into the dive, at a depth of 17m one of the divers indicated that he 
had 50 bar remaining.  The buddy signaled that they should 
ascend a wall to a depth of 12m.  From here they moved to a 
mooring buoy line to use this as a reference to ascend.  On the 
way to the mooring buoy the diver with 50 bar collected some 
scallops and put them in a bag attached to his jacket.  At the 
bottom of the line the diver had 35 bar.  They ascended to 6m and 
conducted a 2 min safety stop.  There was no current and visibility 
was good.  Both divers achieved neutral buoyancy during the stop.  
They then ascended to the surface.  At the surface the diver who 
had been low on air lay on his back with his regulator out of his 
mouth saying 'I need air, I need air'.  The buddy offered his 
alternative air source but the troubled diver pushed it away, he 
then sank below the surface.  The buddy dumped the air from his 
jacket and dived down after him.  He caught him at 2m and tried to 
inflate his BCD with the direct feed hose.  It did not work.  It is 
believed that the cylinder was empty.  The buddy used his own 
jacket to bring them to the surface.  Back at the surface the 
troubled diver said that the scallop bag was heavy and the buddy 
ripped it from his BCD.  Whilst doing so they sank again.  The 
buddy again used his own BCD to bring them back to the surface.  
At the surface the troubled diver grabbed the regulator from the 
buddy's mouth, but it would not reach him and it fell out of reach.  
The buddy let go of the other diver and found his own alternative 
air source.  The other diver sank once more.  The buddy followed 
him again and when he reached him he tried to release his 
weightbelt.  The distressed diver was wearing a harness type 
weightbelt and the buddy was not able to undo the velcro straps.  
The distressed diver then grabbed the buddy's alternative air 
source from his mouth.  The buddy took in some water and 
released the other diver to replace his regulator.  He then shot to 
the surface and the distressed diver sank to the seabed, 
apparently unconscious.  At the surface the buddy's main 
regulator was free flowing and although he could see the other 
diver, 8 m below, he only had 10 bar and was not able to dive 
again to recover him.  He shouted for assistance, and several 
divers from the same group entered the water, from the shore, to 
assist.  After a brief search the casualty was located in 8m of 
water by one of the rescuing divers.  This diver found that there 
was no air in his BCD cylinder, he saw bubbles coming from the 
shoulder dump and freed the dump cord to allow the valve to 
close.  He could not find an inflator for the casualty's drysuit.  The 
casualty was wearing a harness type weightbelt and this had 
slipped around his body.  Another diver released one of the 
weights from its pouch and the casualty was lifted to the surface.  
He was towed ashore and resuscitation techniques were applied.  
One of the casualty's fins was missing and this was later found 
floating at the surface.  An ambulance was called and arrived 
within 15 min and resuscitation was continued for approximately 
another 40 min.  A doctor pronounced the casualty dead at the 
scene and he was airlifted away. 
 
 
 
BSAC Fatalities against membership 1982-2001 
(UK fatalities only) 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
BSAC UK Fatalities     Membership ('000)
 
May 2001 01/301 
A trainee diver on his second open water dive panicked and made 
an uncontrolled ascent to the surface.  At the surface he pulled the 
corrugated hose off of his BCD and was thus unable to inflate it.  
He was wearing a 16 kg weightbelt and this was not released.  
The diver then sank back to the bottom.  Another diver brought 
him to the surface and the alarm was raised.  The diver was 
brought ashore and resuscitation commenced.  The diver was 
taken to hospital and placed on a life support machine.  He died 
some weeks later. 
May 2001 01/155 
Two divers were completing a rebreather dive to a maximum depth 
of 50m.  One of the pair prepared and deployed a delayed SMB.  
When he looked for his buddy he was not to be seen.  The 
Coastguard was alerted and an extensive air and sea search, 
involving two lifeboats and two warships, was conducted.  The 
missing diver was not found. 
May 2001 01/156 
Two divers undertook a dive to a wreck in a depth of 65m.  The 
divers descended a buoy line that had been previously tied to the 
wreck.  They reached the deck of the wreck at a depth of 60m.  
Both were using air.  They explored the wreck and on their return 
to the buoy line one of the pair appeared to fall unconscious.  The 
buddy started to lift the unconscious diver using a controlled 
buoyant lift.  During the ascent the diver regained consciousness 
and fought his buddy away.  He then tried to inflate his suit but lost 
buoyancy and began to sink.  The buddy continued his ascent and 
deployed an SMB to complete his decompression stops.  Others 
at the surface realized that only one diver was decompressing and 
searched the surface for the other.  The single diver surfaced after 
a total dive time of 50 min.  The Coastguard was alerted that the 
other diver was missing.  2 min after the first diver surfaced two 
other divers entered the water and descended the buoy line.  At 
the wreck the visibility was about 4m but there was no ambient 
light.  There was a strobe attached to the buoy line.  They saw a 
fin and found the missing diver lying in a recess on the deck of the 
wreck.  There were no signs of life.  They attempted to inflate the 
diver's BCD and drysuit but this had no effect.  They attempted to 
lift him but were not able to.  One of the pair prepared a delayed 
SMB to mark the position of the diver.  Their activities had stirred 
up the silt and visibility reduced to zero.  The diver with the SMB 
rose out of the silt cloud.  She noted that 11 min had elapsed and 
this was the limit of their planned dive.  She decided that it was 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC - 2001  7 
time to ascend.  She abandoned the delayed SMB to avoid 
becoming tangled in it and swam to the torch light of her buddy.  
She signaled to the buddy that they should ascend.  At this time 
the buddy had his pony cylinder in his hand and was pointing and 
shouting.  She was not able to understand the signals.  The pony 
cylinder was known to contain nitrox 60.  She offered her 
alternative air source but the buddy indicated that he did not want 
it.  The buddy's torch was hanging from his arm and rotating; the 
light blinded the other diver.  Again she signaled the ascent but the 
buddy continued to shout and signal.  She took hold of the buddy 
and attempted to put some air in his suit to begin the ascent, but 
he pushed her off and went back into the silt to the lost diver.  
With a fading torch and an elapsed time of 14 min the diver began 
her ascent.  She waved her torch in the direction of her buddy as a 
marker.  She made an ascent to the surface completing a total of 
25 min of decompression at 9, 6 and 3m.  A helicopter and two 
offshore and several inshore lifeboats were at the scene.  A fifth 
member of the party then entered the water and descended to the 
wreck.  At the deck of the wreck he spent a few minutes 
orientating himself and then began to look around.  He found the 
body of the first diver about 3m from the buoy line.  One fin was 
missing and there were no signs of life.  He moved towards the 
body and then noticed a torch beam to his right, he turned and 
found the second diver lying half in a hold, he also showed no 
signs of life, he shook him but there was no response.  This diver 
appeared to have a rope wrapped around one of his legs.  With his 
bottom time running out the fifth diver began his ascent to the 
surface.  Fog then descended and further action was called off.  
Three of the party were taken ashore by lifeboat.  Later Navy 
divers arrived to recover the missing divers but a flooding tide and 
low underwater visibility prevented them from locating the divers' 
bodies.  The divers' bodies were recovered six days later by a 
Navy team using an ROV. 
May 2001 01/160 
Two divers entered the water and descended to the seabed at a 
depth of 16m.  They carried a surface marker buoy.  One of the 
pair indicated that he wanted to ascend.  The other diver started to 
wind in the SMB line and then noticed that the first diver was now 
lying on his back on the seabed, motionless and with his 
mouthpiece out of his mouth.  The buddy tried to replace the 
regulator but was not able to do so.  The buddy lifted the casualty 
to the surface using the casualty's drysuit.  The dive duration was 
5 min.  At the surface the buddy signaled distress and the divers 
were quickly recovered into the boat.  The casualty was 
unconscious and not breathing.  Resuscitation techniques were 
applied and the Coastguard was alerted.  The casualty was 
airlifted to a recompression facility from where he was taken to a 
hospital.  He was later declared dead.  The diver was found to 
have suffered a pulmonary barotrauma. 
May 2001 01/165 
A diver became trapped in a wreck at a depth of 34m.  This diver 
had removed his air cylinder to allow him to enter the wreck.  His 
buddy surfaced to raise the alarm and returned with a spare air 
cylinder.  In the poor underwater visibility he was unable to relocate 
the missing diver.  A search was conducted by a helicopter, a 
lifeboat, a warship and other craft but the diver was not found.  
The diver's body was recovered by police divers six days later. 
June 2001 01/190 
Two divers were waiting to enter the water when the alternative air 
source of one of the pair began to free flow.  The regulator was 
switched off and then on again but it continued to free flow.  The 
diver requested that the cylinder be switched off and stated that he 
would conduct a shorter dive using the other cylinder and 
regulator.  They conducted a normal dive to a maximum depth of 
27m.  At the end of the dive the buddy began to deploy a delayed 
SMB.  He noticed that the diver who had had the free flow problem 
was having difficulty controlling his buoyancy and that he was 
floating upwards.  The buddy tried to pull the other diver down.  
However the buoyant diver was carried to the surface.  The buddy 
followed quickly and found the buoyant diver face down, at the 
surface, with no regulator in his mouth.  He summoned help and 
other divers from the boat jumped in to help.  The diver was 
recovered into the boat and resuscitation techniques were applied.  
Total dive duration was 16 min.  The Coastguard was alerted and 
the casualty was taken to the shore by lifeboat.  He was later 
declared dead.  The buddy was placed on oxygen and taken to 
hospital from where he was released the following day.  A post 
mortem indicated that the casualty had suffered a heart attack. 
July 2001 01/218 
A group of divers planned to dive a wreck at a depth of 120 to 
130m.  They expected to use a shotline that had previously been 
placed on the wreck.  When they arrived at the site the shot buoy 
was not visible.  They placed a new shot.  The first diver entered 
the water.  10 min later a second diver entered the water and 
started his descent.  He soon resurfaced have received a 
message that was 'passed up the line'  that the shot was not on 
the wreck.  By this time the original shot had surfaced as the 
current slackened.  The second diver went down the original 
shotline.  Other divers followed him.  These other divers 
subsequently reported that the two shots were tangled at 80m.  
The second diver failed to resurface.  A search was mounted 
involving the Coastguard, two lifeboats, a helicopter and other craft 
but no trace of him was found.  This diver was using a closed 
circuit rebreather.  The lost diver's body was recovered 4 weeks 
later. 
July 2001 01/237 
Two divers were ascending from a dive to 30m.  At 15m they 
deployed a delayed SMB.  One of the pair became tangled in this 
line and the divers were separated.  The buddy surfaced and 
raised the alarm.  A helicopter and two lifeboats were tasked to 
search for the missing diver but he was not found.  The missing 
diver was using a rebreather. 
August 2001 01/255 
A pair of divers were at a depth of 15m.  One of the pair began to 
experience problems controlling his buoyancy and hung onto some 
ropes on the seabed.  When he let go he started to ascend.  He 
vented air from his drysuit and was showing no signs of distress.  
His buddy waited for him to re-descend.  When he didn't she 
ascended to find him unconscious at the surface.  The casualty 
was recovered from the water and resuscitation techniques were 
applied but the casualty failed to recover. 
August 2001 01/261 
A diver experienced breathing difficulties during a dive.  He was 
towed to the shore by his buddy.  Medical assistance was called 
but the casualty rapidly deteriorated and was pronounced dead at 
the scene. 
September 2001 01/287 
A diver surfaced unconscious from a drift dive and then sank 
again.  An extensive search involving two lifeboats, a helicopter 
and eight private and commercial vessels failed to locate the 
missing diver. 
 
 
 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001 
8        ©BS-AC - 2001 
Decompression Incidents 
 
 
October 2000 01/321 
A dive to 25m/45 min followed by a second 22m/45 min dive led to 
this diver suffering DCI. He was transported by road to a 
hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report). 
October 2000 01/135 
Two divers completed a dive to 16m.  One of the pair released a 
delayed SMB, but the homemade reel failed and he was lifted 
rapidly to 7m.  They completed a 5 min stop at 6m and then 
surfaced.  Total dive duration was 40 min.  This diver then 
conducted a second dive to a maximum depth of 15m.  The boat 
was recovered onto its trailer with a lot of effort from this diver.  He 
then experienced a minor dizziness whilst changing and later 
discovered a skin rash.  He sought medical advice and a possible 
skin bend was diagnosed.  He was not advised to seek 
recompression treatment. 
October 2000 01/322 
A diver with suspected DCI was evacuated to a hyperbaric unit by 
RAF helicopter.  (Coastguard report). 
October 2000 01/323 
A 20m dive for 25 min resulted in this diver complaining of tingling 
in the foot. She was airlifted to a hyperbaric unit for treatment.  
(Coastguard report). 
October 2000 01/324 
Medical advice from Coastguard was sought by this diver after 
DCI symptoms appeared following 50m dives (with a fast ascent) 
over the past 2 days.  (Coastguard report). 
October 2000 01/328 
A rapid buoyant ascent from 57m (dive time 35 min), due to 
inflation of 'wings' BCD. Oxygen given on the surface for 20 min. 
This diver started to lose feeling in the legs and arms, had a 
headache and was vomiting. He was airlifted to a hyperbaric unit 
by Coastguard helicopter.  (Coastguard report). 
October 2000 01/329 
A 20m dive for 44 min, with a one minute stop, led to this diver 
experiencing 'pins and needles' in the legs. He was taken to a 
hyperbaric unit by ambulance.  (Coastguard report). 
October 2000 01/320 
A diver who had surfaced too quickly was taken to a 
recompression facility for treatment.  A full recovery was 
anticipated.  (Newspaper report only) 
October 2000 01/029 
Two divers completed a dive to 32m and deployed a delayed SMB 
to make their ascent.  During the ascent one of the pair felt light 
and struggled to control her buoyancy.  At 10m she lost control 
and made a rapid ascent to the surface missing 7 min of 
decompression stops.  Her buddy completed his stops.  The 
buoyant diver was recovered into the boat and placed on oxygen.  
She developed a tingling in her hands.  The Coastguard was 
alerted and the diver was airlifted to a recompression facility for 
treatment.  It was later found that the undersuit, which had a 
smooth finish, had blocked the drysuit dump valve thus preventing 
the expanding air from escaping. 
October 2000 01/330 
Two divers were transported by ambulance to a hyperbaric unit 
following a fast ascent and DCI. Both dived to 21m for 24 min but 
made a fast ascent from 17m.  (Coastguard & RNLI report). 
November 2000 01/053 
A diver completed a dive to 39m for 61 min including 22 min of 
decompression stops.  2 hours 30 min later he dived again to 35m 
for 57 min including 22 min of decompression stops.  The 
following day, 18 hours later, he dived again to 35m for 61 min 
including 22 min of decompression stops.  After this dive he 
noticed a rash on the arm and shoulder of his left arm.  He was 
placed on oxygen and the rash disappeared.  He sought medical 
advice and received recompression treatment.  His companion's 
computer had cleared 5 min before his.  At 3m he had exercised 
slightly because of a problem with the shot and he may have been 
dehydrated. 
November 2000 01/331 
A dive to 33m and fast ascent led to suspected DCI and 
evacuation by inshore lifeboat to a hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard & 
RNLI report). 
November 2000 01/048 
Two pairs of divers were conducting a dive to 32m.  One of the 
divers was undertaking the dive as part of deep dive training.  
During the ascent this diver had a problem with her regulator.  She 
changed to her alternative air source.  She started to panic and the 
instructor brought her to the surface.  At the surface she appeared 
to be well but then she became unconscious.  She was given 
recompression treatment and then transported to a hospital with a 
recompression chamber. 
November 2000 01/060 
Two divers conducted a dive to 42m.  Both divers were using 
independent twin 10 litre cylinders.  One of the divers noticed that 
one of his cylinders was only at 160 bar prior to the dive.  He 
started with this cylinder and when it reached 50 bar he changed 
to the second cylinder.  Towards the end of the dive, at a depth of 
20m, he ran out of air on the second cylinder and switched back to 
the first.  However this cylinder gave him no air.  He was too far 
from his buddy to seek assistance so he made a fast, free, ascent 
to the surface, missing decompression stops.  His buddy followed, 
making a slower ascent but also missing stops.  On reaching the 
surface the diver who had been out of air was placed on oxygen 
and the Coastguard was contacted.  Medical advice was sought 
and they were advised to attend a recompression facility as a 
precaution.  Both divers were taken to the recompression facility 
by lifeboat where they were given precautionary recompression 
treatment.  The only symptom experienced was a slight pain in the 
elbow of the buddy. 
November 2000 01/332 
A diver was taken to a hyperbaric unit by ambulance after 
complaining of tingling and aching shoulder following a dive.  
(Coastguard report). 
March 2001 01/101 
A few minutes into a dive, at a depth of 20m a diver's regulator 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC -2001  9 
began to free flow.  His buddy brought him to the surface.  They 
made a very fast ascent.  The diver with the free flow experienced 
a loss of balance and a violent headache.  He was given oxygen 
and made an initial recovery, but then the condition worsened.  
The diver was given recompression treatment and then transferred 
to hospital.  He was later discharged after medical examination. 
March 2001 01/256 
Two divers conducted a wreck dive to a maximum depth of 21m.  
Towards the end of the dive they were at 16m and one of the pair 
indicated that something was wrong.  The other diver deployed a 
delayed SMB and they made their ascent to the surface.  The dive 
time was 36 min to 6m and no stops were required.  At the surface 
the troubled diver was very disorientated and she and her buddy 
were recovered into their boat.  The diver was placed on oxygen 
and attempts were made to contact the Coastguard.  However 
their radio did not work correctly and they used a mobile phone 
provided by other divers.  The two divers were taken by lifeboat to 
a recompression facility where the casualty was given treatment.  
She was released 24 hours later having made a full recovery.  A 
vestibular DCI was diagnosed.  The casualty had been using 
nitrox 25. 
April 2001 01/129 
Two divers were airlifted to hospital with suspected DCI after a 
rapid ascent.  (Coastguard report) 
April 2001 01/124 
The Coastguard was alerted when two divers were missing after a 
42m wreck dive.  A lifeboat and a helicopter were tasked to 
search, and two other lifeboats, which were on exercise, and 
another dive boat went to help.  The divers were located at the 
surface by the helicopter and recovered by one of the lifeboats.  
As the emergency services left the area the same group reported 
two more missing divers.  They were located by the assisting dive 
boat and taken ashore by one of the lifeboats.  The helicopter was 
recalled to airlift one of these divers to a recompression facility for 
possible treatment. 
April 2001 01/151 
With a surface interval of 20 hours 41 min from a previous dive, a 
diver conducted a dive to 26m for 40 min with a 1 min stop at 6m.  
2 hours 31 min later she dived to 18m for 33 min with a 1 min stop 
at 6m.  20 hours 30 min later she dived again to 40m for 32 min 
with stops for 1 min at 9m, 3 min at 6m and 4 min at 3m.  The 
stops on this last dive were longer than indicated by her dive 
computer.  30 min after  surfacing she noticed a pain in her left 
breast.  The pain worsened over the next 2 hours to become a 
burning sensation.  The top part of the breast was covered with a 
mottled red rash, it irritated and was very painful.  She began to 
breathe oxygen.  After 1 hour the rash had virtually gone and the 
pain had reduced.  After a further 2 hours the pain had gone.  The 
following day she sought medical advice and was advised to report 
to a recompression facility.  She was recompressed.  There was a 
mild residual discomfort and she received two further sessions of 
recompression on subsequent days.  No further improvement was 
effected. 
April 2001 01/132 
During a dive to a maximum depth of 36m a diver became tangled 
in line.  The time spent untangling her resulted in this diver and 
her buddy surfacing having missed decompression stop because 
of a lack of air.  The Coastguard was alerted and the divers were 
taken by lifeboat to a recompression facility for treatment.  
(Coastguard report) 
April 2001 01/351 
Following a 38m dive, diver displayed symptoms of DCI. 
Transferred privately to hospital.  (Coastguard report). 
April 2001 01/136 
A diver was involved, as a student, in a search and recovery 
course.  He completed two dives, the first to a maximum depth of 
8m for a total time of 21 min and the second to a maximum depth 
of 7m for a total duration of 48 min.  During these dives multiple 
ascents and descents were made to effect the various searching 
and lifting tasks.  The diver became very cold towards the end of 
the second dive.  During the final ascent he felt dizzy but this 
passed.  After the dive he was involved in the recovery of heavy 
equipment.  Later,  about 90 min after leaving the water, whilst 
driving home, he noticed a deep seated ache in his lower right 
thigh, just above his knee.  The pain grew in intensity.  The 
following morning he awoke to find that he had just a mild ache, 
but by the time he arrived at work the pain had fully returned.  He 
sought medical advice and he was referred to a recompression 
facility.  He received two sessions of recompression treatment.  
The treatment resolved the symptoms for a while but he was left 
with a minor pain that increased during the day with activity. 
April 2001 01/131 
A diver became ill during a dive and surfaced missing 
decompression stops.  The Coastguard was alerted and the diver 
was taken to the shore.  There he was taken by ambulance to 
hospital and then on to a recompression facility for treatment. 
April 2001 01/356 
Diver suffering DCI following 30m dive - transferred by ambulance 
to recompression chamber for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
April 2001 01/355 
DCI symptoms - airlifted to hospital.  (Coastguard report). 
April 2001 01/274 
An instructor was engaged in a training dive with two students.  
They dived to a maximum of 9m.  After 20 min one of the trainees 
experienced buoyancy problems, stirred up silt from the bottom 
and began to move down a slope.  The instructor decided to stop 
the dive at this point.  The trainee ascended too fast and the 
instructor tried to control this but they made a rapid ascent to the 
surface.  The instructor had previously had spinal surgery that had 
left him with some residual numbness in his feet.  The following 
day his legs felt heavy and he had pain in his arms.  He sought 
medical advice and was referred to a recompression facility where 
he was recompressed the following day.  He was advised to 
refrain from any further diving, even in a swimming pool. 
April 2001 01/215 
A diver conducted a 43m dive for 30 min, including a 2 min stop at 
9m and a 5 min stop at 6m.  3 hours later he dived again to a 
maximum depth of 9m for a total duration of 28 min.  Later that day 
he developed a headache.  The following morning he felt ill and 
visited his local hospital.  He was referred to a recompression 
facility where a neurological bend was diagnosed.  He received 
recompression treatment and a full recovery was made.  He was 
tested for a PFO but none was found. 
May 2001 01/361 
After a 59m, trimix dive, diver displayed DCI symptoms. Diver and 
buddy transferred to hospital for treatment and observation.  
(Coastguard report). 
May 2001 01/363 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001 
10        ©BS-AC - 2001 
Diver missed decompression stops following 59 m dive.  
Displayed DCI symptoms and transferred to hospital.  
(Coastguard report). 
 
 
Decompression incidents by month 
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
May 2001 01/286 
Two divers began a dive and descended to a depth of 12m.  They 
were then caught in a current that carried them rapidly up to 6m, 
over rock and then down to 28m.  They deployed a delayed SMB 
and made an ascent to the surface with a few minutes of safety 
stop at 6m.  One of the divers' computers indicated a fast ascent 
warning.  They dived the following day without a problem.  Four 
days later one of the divers developed symptoms of DCI and 
sought medical advice.  She was recompressed.  Her buddy was 
contacted and she too had symptoms, and also reported to a 
recompression facility for treatment.  Both divers received over 
twenty recompression treatments over a period of two weeks.  
Both showed signs of recovery and then subsequent deterioration.  
One of the pair went on a foreign holiday but became ill whilst 
away.  She received treatment abroad but then discharged herself 
and made her own way home for further treatment.  Spinal DCIs 
were diagnosed, both still have residual problems and have been 
advised not to dive again. 
May 2001 01/366 
Following 20m dive/54 min and 36m dive/29 min dive boat 
reported a sick diver who displayed symptoms of DCI.  Treated in 
recompression chamber.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2001 01/368 
Assistance called for by dive boat for diver with possible bends.  
Diver transferred to shore then on to hyperbaric chamber as a 
precaution.  (Coastguard report). 
 
May 2001 01/193 
Two divers were at 25m.  One of the pair experienced problems 
with the buoyancy control of his drysuit.  He signaled his buddy to 
help.  The buddy tried to release air from the suit dump valve, but 
it did not seem to work.  The buoyant diver then signaled that he 
was OK.  The buddy then deployed a delayed SMB and they 
started their ascent.  As soon as they had left the bottom the 
buoyant diver began to rise rapidly to the surface.  The buddy held 
on to him to try to slow the ascent.  Both were carried rapidly to the 
surface.  The dive time was 25 min to the start of the ascent.  At 
the surface the buoyant diver was disorientated.  He was 
recovered into the boat and placed on oxygen.  He complained of a 
severe headache, chest pain and an itching of the right elbow.  
The Coastguard was alerted and the diver was airlifted to a 
recompression facility for treatment.  The buddy experienced no ill 
effects. 
May 2001 01/372 
Diver with suspected bends transferred to shore then on to 
hyperbaric chamber for treatment.  Second dive of day to 30m - 
slightly deeper and longer than first dive.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2001 01/164 
Two divers and an instructor were engaged in their second 
training dive of the day.  The first dive was to 10m for 38 min.  The 
second dive was 3 hours later, and they dived again to 10m.  The 
trainees were practicing the use of alternative air sources and they 
planned to ascend to 6m.  One trainee donated his alternative air 
source to his buddy but could not ascend as the auto dump of his 
drysuit kept releasing air.  The instructor signaled that he should 
adjust this valve.  The diver closed the valve fully and let air into 
his drysuit.  He started a rapid ascent.  He let go of his buddy who 
was able to recover his own regulator.  The buoyant diver went all 
the way to the surface.  The instructor and the other trainee made 
a normal ascent.  At the surface the buoyant diver decided to re-
descend to find his buddy.  The instructor and the other trainee 
arrived at the surface and the instructor went back down the 
buoyant divers bubble trail to find him. They met mid water and 
returned to the surface.  The buoyant diver then towed his buddy 
to the shore, as a training exercise.  Back on the shore he felt 
unwell and was placed on oxygen.  The Coastguard was alerted 
and the diver was taken by ambulance to a recompression facility 
where he received treatment.  It was later learned that the diver 
had re-descended to 15m whilst looking for the buddy and 
instructor. 
May 2001 01/229 
Skipper of dive RHIB reported a diver with possible symptoms of 
DCI.  The casualty was transferred to a recompression chamber 
by CG helicopter and ambulance.  (Coastguard report) 
May 2001 01/273 
Three divers completed a dive to 26m.  There was a brisk current 
that required some physical effort to combat.  During their ascent 
a fast ascent warning was indicated by one of their computers.  
They completed a 1 min stop and surfaced after 29 min.  10 min 
later one of the group began to feel 'pins and needles'  and a 
numbness spreading from his toes up to his waist.  He was placed 
on oxygen.  The nearest recompression facility was 100 km away.  
The diver was recompressed in the water.  This progressively 
dissipated the numbness.  The diver's symptoms fully resolved but 
he later attended the recompression facility and was given a 
precautionary course of decompression treatment. He experienced 
no further problems. 
May 2001 01/180 
Two divers descended to 36m.  At this point the regulator of one of 
the divers failed to supply him with air.  He switched to his 
alternative regulator but this also failed to supply air.  He signaled 
to his buddy that he wanted to ascend.  The buddy was not aware 
of the problem.  The buddy took hold of the diver's BCD air feed 
and put some air into the jacket.  He started a slow ascent.  The 
diver without air was desperate to breathe and used the BCD 
emergency cylinder to inflate the jacket.  They made a rapid 
ascent to the surface.  At the surface he struggled to breathe 
having swallowed water.  He was recovered into his boat.  He 
requested oxygen but there was a delay in supplying it as the key 
to the cylinder valve could not be found.  He breathed oxygen for 
25 min.  He had a numbness in his wrist and a pain in his arm.  By 
the time he was returned to the shore he was feeling breathless.  
He had blurred vision, numbness in his wrist and neck pain.  He 
drove home on his own.  The following morning he phoned a 
recompression facility for advice.  He was taken to the 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC -2001  11 
recompression facility and received two sessions of 
recompression therapy. 
May 2001 01/167 
A diver conducted a series of six dives over a three day period.  
This diver had no foot on his left leg and used an artificial aid 
when diving.   On the fourth day he dived to 42m.  After 15 min he 
ascended to 15m where he stopped for 2 min.  He then completed 
a further 7 min decompression at 9m before making a slow ascent 
to the surface.  The sea was rough and the diver had difficulty 
climbing the ladder back on to the boat.  He fell on the ladder, 
twisting both legs and he was hit in the stomach by his camera.  
Other divers helped him to get into the boat.    He was tired and 
cold and had a pain in his stomach.  He was placed on oxygen for 
20 min, followed by 5 min on air and then a further 15 min on 
oxygen.  7 hours later, whilst being driven home this diver felt 
lightheaded and a little unstable on his feet, he was also unable to 
urinate.  Later his stomach pain increased and he became even 
more unstable, he also had some numbness.  He reported to 
hospital.  He was then taken by ambulance to a recompression 
facility for treatment.  He received six sessions of recompression 
treatment and required further outpatient treatments.  A spinal 
bend was diagnosed. 
May 2001 01/230 
A diver completed a dive to 14m for 40 min including a 3 min stop 
at 6m.  4 hours 15 min later he dived again to 9m for 30 min.  20 
min into the second dive he deployed a delayed SMB.  The line 
became partially tangled on the reel making deployment and 
retrieval difficult.  There was also more surface current and the 
buoy pulled the diver away from his buddy causing him to have to 
swim hard.   The following day he awoke with a tingling on his 
back.  This was still present the next day.  He sought medical 
advice and a possible skin bend was diagnosed.  He received two 
sessions of recompression treatment. 
May 2001 01/384 
Diver displayed DCI symptoms following a rapid ascent from a 6m 
dive.  Transferred to hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard & RNLI report). 
May 2001 01/385 
Skipper of dive vessel sought assistance for a diver with a skin 
bend.  Second dive of the day to 29 m.  Diver transferred by 
ambulance to recompression chamber.  (Coastguard report). 
 
May 2001 01/208 
36 hours after a 35 min dive to 12m a trainee was reported to be 
suffering from DCI.  She was referred to a recompression facility 
for treatment. 
June 2001 01/388 
Symptoms of DCI displayed by diver following a 28 m dive.  
Transferred to hyperbaric facility.  (Coastguard & RNLI report). 
June 2001 01/184 
A diver was surfacing from a 24m dive.  During the ascent he lost 
his weightbelt and made a rapid ascent with no stops.  He was 
recovered into his boat and placed on oxygen.  The Coastguard 
was alerted and a lifeboat was tasked to assist.  The diver was 
transferred by lifeboat to a recompression facility for treatment.  
(Coastguard report). 
June 2001 01/183 
A diver surfaced from a 20m dive.  He was in pain, had a blue face 
and difficulty breathing.  The Coastguard was alerted and a 
lifeboat and a helicopter were tasked to assist.  The diver was 
airlifted to a recompression facility for treatment.  (Coastguard 
report) 
June 2001 01/205 
A pair of divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 36m.  
One of the pair had a problem with her mask and they aborted the 
dive.  At the surface this diver was very distressed by the incident.  
1 hour 40 min later she started to show signs of DCI.  She was 
placed on oxygen and taken by ambulance to a recompression 
facility for treatment. 
June 2001 01/204 
A group of three divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 
35m.  During the ascent one of the pair ran out of air.  She took 
the alternative air source of one of her buddies.  They then lost 
buoyancy control and made a fast ascent from 6m to the surface 
missing 10 min of decompression.  Their dive duration was 40 
min.  They were placed on oxygen but, after 20 min, began to 
show signs of DCI.  They went to a recompression facility for 
treatment. 
June 2001 01/389 
Report of a diver on the beach suffering DCI symptoms.  Taken to 
hyperbaric unit by ambulance.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2001 01/391 
Diver showing symptoms of DCI after missing stops following a 
30m dive.  Medical advice received and diver transferred to 
hospital for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2001 01/199 
Two divers conducted a dive to a depth of 31m.  One of the pair 
had forgotten to put on his weightbelt and during the dive he 
became positively buoyant.  He grabbed his buddy's BCD and 
they both made a rapid ascent from 28m to the surface.  Total dive 
duration 25 min.  Both divers were recovered into their boat and 
placed on oxygen.  One of the pair had white fingers on both 
hands and tingling in his hands.  Their computers indicated 
missed stops.  Both divers were taken to a recompression facility 
and recompressed.  The diver who had shown symptoms was 
detained overnight and given a second recompression treatment 
the following day. 
June 2001 01/394 
Diver surfaced without completing his decompression stops 
(apparently due to inability to dump enough air in time).  
Transferred to recompression chamber for treatment.  
(Coastguard report). 
June 2001 01/395 
Rescue helicopter and inshore lifeboat assisted in the medivac of 
a diver suffering DCI - transferred to hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard 
& RNLI report). 
June 2001 01/236 
A diver completed a dive to 36m for a duration of 27 min including 
a 2 min stop at 3m.  During this dive he had to swim against a 
current.  After a surface interval of 59 min he conducted a second 
dive.  This dive was to 29m for 28 min with a 6 min stop at 3m.  
His dive computer recorded increased air consumption during the 
first dive and an ascent rate alarm between 29m and 20m on the 
second dive.  Shortly after the second dive he experienced pain in 
his upper left arm and shoulder.  He initially thought that this was 
due to muscle strain.  The pain increased during the night and 
early the following day he sought medical advice.  He was given 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001 
12        ©BS-AC - 2001 
recompression therapy and this resulted in a significant reduction 
in the pain.  The DCI was at the site of a previous sports injury. 
June 2001 01/202 
Following a dive 31m/41 min and 35m/30 min diver suffering joint 
pains after surfacing.  Treatment at recompression chamber.  No 
missed stops.  (Coastguard report) 
June 2001 01/240 
A diver conducted a dive to 33m for 45 min with a 10 min stop at 
6m and a 1 min stop at 3m.  6 hours 30 min later she dived again 
to 31m for 38 min with 6 min at 6m and 1 min at 3m.  Her 
computer and that of her buddy indicated no missed 
decompression.  90 min after the last dive she experienced skin 
itching, visual disturbances, and concentration and memory 
difficulties.  She sought help from a recompression facility and 
received two sessions of recompression therapy.  Four weeks 
later she was given the all clear to dive again. 
June 2001 01/242 
A diver completed a dive to 37m for 53 min including 17 min at 
4m.  1 hour 38 min later he dived again, to 31m for 31 min with 3 
min at 3m.  After the second dive he noticed a pain in both his 
shoulders.  He drank some water and the pain resolved.  He put it 
down to muscular strain gained whilst launching the boat.  2 hours 
later the pain returned and fluctuated in strength for the following 7 
hours.  Early the following morning he was awakened by the pain 
which then lessened after 30 min.  When he arose that morning 
he sought medical advice.  DCI was confirmed and he was given 
three sessions of recompression therapy. 
June 2001 01/399 
On a wreck dive, diver made a rapid ascent and complained of 
stomach pains.  Transferred to recompression chamber by 
helicopter.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2001 01/234 
A diver completed a 28 min dive to 31m with a 3 min stop at 6m.  2 
hours 59 min later she dived again, this time to 26m for 39m.  She 
stopped at 6m for 2 min and 3m for 1 min.  Some time after the 
dive, when ashore, she noted an itch and dull ache in her left 
shoulder.  The Coastguard was contacted and the diver was taken 
by helicopter and ambulance to a recompression facility.  She 
received a 5 hour recompression treatment.  Her dive computer 
showed no reason for the DCI.  It was a very hot day and this diver 
may have been dehydrated. 
June 2001 01/401 
CG helicopter evacuated a diver who had been entangled in nets 
over a wreck to the recompression chamber.  Diver believed to 
have missed some 30 min of decompression stops (low air).  
(Coastguard report). 
June 2001 01/226 
Two divers completed a dive to 42m.  During the ascent they 
stopped at 15m to deploy a delayed SMB.  They then moved up to 
a planned 9m stop.  At this point one of the divers felt too buoyant, 
she was able to dump air from her drysuit but still felt too light.  
She disconnected the suit direct feed and opened her neck seal.  
Air was dumped but she was now at 4m and unable to prevent 
herself from being carried to the surface.  Her buddy completed 
the planned stops.  The buoyant diver's dive duration was 26 min 
and she had missed 7 min of decompression stops.  She was 
recovered into the boat and given oxygen and water.  After 20 min 
she noted a pain in her right elbow.  The Coastguard was alerted.  
An ambulance met them at the shore and she was given 
intravenous fluids and taken to a recompression facility where she 
received treatment for 6 hours 45 min.  Her drysuit inflator was 
subsequently found to have been stuck slightly open. 
June 2001 01/404 
Female diver (45 yr old) reported as having possible bends 
following a 27m dive.  Subsequent transferal to hyperbaric unit for 
treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/405 
Self-referral of a male diver to hyperbaric chamber for treatment.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/406 
Diver transferred from dive boat to recompression chamber 
suffering from suspected DCI.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/407 
Report of a diver who had made a rapid ascent displaying DCI 
symptoms.  Casualty airlifted to recompression chamber for 
treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/248 
A diver conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 53m.  He planned 
to ascend after 20 min and conduct a 20 min stop on nitrox 64.  
However he was not able to control his buoyancy and made an 
ascent directly to the surface.  It was later determined that the 
inflation valve to his BCD had been actuated by becoming trapped 
against a side mounted cylinder.  The diver was able to climb into 
the boat.  Shortly afterwards he developed stomach cramp and 
began to lose the feeling in his legs.  He breathed nitrox 64 whilst 
the oxygen set was prepared.  The Coastguard was alerted and 
the diver was taken by helicopter to hospital.  He received two 
sessions of recompression treatment.  The feeling in his legs 
returned but he still had pain in his legs and was unable to walk.  
He was released from hospital four days later with almost fully 
recovered feeling, regained bladder control and with 90% of his 
ability to walk.  A spinal bend was diagnosed.  It was anticipated 
that the casualty would make a good recovery but he was advised 
not to dive again. 
July 2001 01/410 
Diver transferred to hyperbaric unit after reporting DCI symptoms.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/249 
Two divers conducted a dive to 45m for 33 min with a 1 min stop 
at 9m and a 3 min stop at 6m.  2 hours 30 min later they dived to 
26m for 33 min with a precautionary 2 min stop at 6m.  20 hours 
later they dived again to 43m.  After 25 min one of the pair began 
to feel ill and was sick.  They started their ascent.  She was sick 
again at 30m.  They completed a 2 min stop at 9m and a 2 min 
stop at 6m.  At this point she was repeatedly sick and made an 
ascent to the surface.  Her buddy went with her.  The sick diver 
was using nitrox 23 and had missed 17 min of decompression, her 
buddy was using air and had missed 27 min decompression.  
Both divers were placed on oxygen and the Coastguard was 
alerted.  Medical advice was sought and the divers were taken by 
helicopter to a recompression facility.  They exhibited balance 
problems and both were recompressed.  The sick diver was given 
a seasickness pill that helped.  The treatment resolved the 
symptoms.  One of the doctors suggested that oxygen poisoning 
may have played a part in this incident. 
July 2001 01/411 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC -2001  13 
Dive support vessel reported a diver suffering from DCI symptoms 
possibly caused by error of judgment. Transferal to hyperbaric 
chamber.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/412 
Self referral of a diver with possible DCI for treatment at 
hyperbaric unit.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/416 
After missing decompressions stops following a dive to 36m dive, 
diver transferred to hyperbaric chamber for treatment.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/417 
Medical advice arranged for diver, with subsequent treatment at 
hyperbaric chamber - following a dive to 43m.  Diver complaining 
of shoulder pain.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/418 
Female diver made a rapid ascent and suffered mild DCI 
symptoms.  Medilink was made, oxygen administered and diver 
made a full recovery.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/420 
999 call from dive boat mobile phone reporting a diver unwell 
following a dive to 36m.  Diver transferred to hyperbaric unit for 
treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/421 
Diver described as being fairly fit, but with history of DCI 
transferred by ambulance to hyperbaric chamber for treatment 
following a dive to 34m.  (Coastguard report). 
 
July 2001 01/423 
Treatment at hyperbaric chamber for diver with DCI symptoms.  
No apparent problems during the dives - 40m/18 min (Day 1) 
36m/41 min (Day 2).  (Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/426 
A diver who missed decompression stops (cause unknown) was 
airlifted to recompression chamber for treatment for DCI.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/428 
Two divers suffering DCI were taken ashore by their dive RHIB 
then airlifted to hyperbaric unit for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/275 
A pair of divers made a dive to 46m.  They started their ascent 
with 8 min of decompression stops indicated on their computers.  
They made a steady ascent during which their decompression 
requirement rose to 15 min.  At the surface one of the divers 
experienced difficulty taking his kit off and stated that he could not 
move his arms or legs.  Other divers lifted him from the water and 
he was placed on oxygen.  The Coastguard was alerted and a 
helicopter was sent to assist.  The diver breathed oxygen for 14 
min and then nitrox 60 thereafter.  He was flown to a 
recompression facility where he received treatment.  No problem 
was found with the dive profile downloaded from his computer.  
One week later his upper body had recovered and he had full 
movement in one leg and partial movement in the other. 
 
 
 
Percentage analysis of factors involved in 
cases of DCI 
0 10 20 30 40 50
Percentage Occurrence
Repeat Dives  
Misuse/Missed
stops  
Within Limits  
Rapid Ascent  
Dive >30m  
 
 
August 2001 01/430 
Dive vessel reported a diver complaining of leg cramps after 
surfacing, possibly related to DCI.  Diver transferred to hyperbaric 
chamber for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/437 
Following a 40m/54min dive - diver reported unwell.  Subsequent 
transferal to hyperbaric chamber for recompression.  (Coastguard 
report). 
 
August 2001 01/438 
Diving on air - 36m/49min the previous day - diver reported tingling 
in side.  Transferal to hyperbaric chamber for recompression.  
(Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/283 
A female diver suffered a suspected epileptic fit following a 10m 
dive.  Oxygen administered and subsequent transferral to hospital.  
(Linked to 01/284)  (Coastguard report) 
August 2001 01/443 
Following two dives to 13m and 10m, symptoms of DCI were 
experienced by diver.  Immediate evacuation was carried out 
following medical advice with treatment at recompression 
chamber.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/442 
Diver displaying DCI upon surfacing, administered oxygen by his 
dive club after a dive to 38m. Club declined medical advice offered 
by HMCG.  Subsequently persuaded to obtain advice from 
hyperbaric unit and diver transferred to nearby hospital for 
treatment and monitoring.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/445 
Call on VHF radio from dive vessel reporting unwell male diver 
who had made a rapid ascent from 36m.  Diver insisted he was 
OK - but following medical examination, diver transferred to 
hyperbaric chamber for 6 hours recompression.  (Coastguard 
report). 
August 2001 01/446 
Male diver sought medical advice following repetitive diving for a 
week and several deep dives, after suffering shoulder pains.  
Recompression advised.  (Coastguard report). 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001 
14        ©BS-AC - 2001 
August 2001 01/298 
Two divers with symptoms of DCI were airlifted to hospital.  
(Newspaper report only) 
 
 
Decompression data source analysis 
0 20 40 60 80 100
Newspaper
RNLI
BSAC Reports
Coastguard
 
August 2001 01/278 
Two divers completed a dive to 39m for a duration of 42 min 
including 13 min of decompression stops.  Both their computers 
cleared before they surfaced.  1 hour 30 min later one of the divers 
noticed that her stomach felt tender and painful and that a blotchy 
rash was developing.  She was placed on oxygen.  The rash 
spread to cover her torso, shoulders and upper arms.  She had 
stomach and shoulder pain.  The Coastguard was contacted and 
the diver was driven to a recompression facility where she 
received treatment.  She was released the following day.  The dive 
did not involve strenuous activity and their computer dive profile 
showed no abnormal events.  The diver was planning to be 
assessed for a PFO. 
August 2001 01/281 
A diver completed a dive to 37m for a duration of 72 min including 
4 min at 6m and 24 min at 3m.  At the surface he noticed a pain in 
his left shoulder.  He was placed on oxygen for 30 min and the 
pain cleared.  He drove home but then noticed that his arm was 
starting to colour and the pain returned.  He sought medical advice 
and was taken by helicopter to a recompression facility where he 
was treated for a type 2 DCI. 
August 2001 01/279 
A diver completed a dive to 46m for a duration of 43 min.  She 
completed the decompression stops indicated by her computer 
plus an extra stop at 9m, 2 min extra at 6m and 3 min extra at 3m.  
1 hour 30 min later she noticed an itching on her left elbow, and a 
red rash.  A few minutes later her shoulders felt tender.  She was 
placed on nitrox 70 and drank some water.  The rash went after 
about 1 hour leaving her with a slight tenderness of her upper left 
arm.  This tenderness continued for the next few days.  She then 
sought medical advice and was recompressed.  Her symptoms 
were resolved and she was referred for a PFO test. 
August 2001 01/280 
A diver completed a dive to 37m and conducted the stops 
indicated by his computer plus an additional 5 min.  His dive 
duration was 40 min including 3 min at 6m and 15 min at 3m.  1 
hour 30 min later he noticed a rash on his left arm.  He drank 
some fluids and was returned to the shore.  30 min later the rash 
had gone.  He took more fluids and breathed nitrox 50.  No other 
symptoms were experienced.  He accompanied another diver 
suffering from DCI to a recompression facility and joined this diver 
in the recompression chamber as a precautionary treatment.  
(Linked to 01/279). 
August 2001 01/291 
A diver completed a series of six dives over a period of three days 
to a maximum depth of 30m.  On the third day he dived to 31m for 
30 min with a 5 min stop at 6m.  2 hours 27 min later he dived 
again, this time to 15m for 45 min with a 3 min stop at 6m.  The 
diver used a computer and started his ascent when there was a 3 
min decompression stop showing.  This had cleared by the time 
he reached 6m but he completed a 3 min safety stop.  Whilst 
driving home after the last dive he noticed a 'twitch' in his right 
elbow.  Later his arm became weak and he started to lose 
sensation.  He developed a tingling in his fingers and some 
numbness.  He contacted a recompression facility and a colleague 
with an oxygen set.  He was placed on oxygen and taken to the 
recompression facility.  The diver received three treatments over a 
period of four days after which no further treatment was 
necessary. 
August 2001 01/453 
Diver with suspected bends given oxygen, then airlifted to 
hyperbaric chamber for treatment. Dive to 41m 34 min - nitrox 27.  
(Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/452 
Dive vessel requested assistance for a diver who had missed a 
decompression stop.  Diver had 'bent' own computer the previous 
day and had been working on a borrowed one until his cleared!  
Recompression at chamber - 3 hours.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/317 
Assistance rendered to a diver with suspected DCI by RNLI LB.  
Subsequent transferal to hyperbaric chamber.  Dived 30m for 
47m.  Previous day's dive - 50m for 1 hour.  (Coastguard report) 
August 2001 01/297 
A 15 year old diver surfaced from a dive to 31m and complained of 
a pain in his knee joint.  He was flown by helicopter to a 
recompression facility for treatment. 
September 2001 01/292 
A diver commenced a dive with a trainee.  The trainee became 
tangled in the shotline near the surface.  They sank to 8m and 
then came back up to 3m.  The dive leader freed him and they 
sank quickly to 11m.  The dive leader began to lift the trainee.  The 
trainee then inflated his suit and they made a rapid ascent to the 
surface.  The dive was aborted.  2 hours 10 min later she dived 
again, this time to 14m for a duration of 36 min.  2 hours 10 min 
later she dived again to 19m for a total duration of 29 min, 
including a 2 min stop at 6m.  The following day she dived to 30m 
for 26 min.  The following day she felt 'pins and needles' in her 
right calf muscle.  This went when she walked, but returned later 
that day.  She sought advice from a recompression facility and 
undertook a precautionary recompression treatment.  Dehydration 
and the proximity of her period were cited as potentially 
exacerbating factors.  The treatment resolved her symptoms. 
September 2001 01/457 
Following a 22m/36 min dive - diver complained of sore joints.  
Oxygen administered then casualty submerged to 27m!.  Diver 
subsequently transferred to recompression chamber for treatment.  
(Coastguard report). 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC -2001  15 
September 2001 01/458 
Rapid ascent made by diver after running out of air at 26m.  
Despite having practiced rescue drills 3 days earlier, this diver 
made no attempt to air share, but bolted for the surface.   Diver 
airlifted to recompression chamber for treatment - buddy (who had 
made a controlled ascent) required no treatment.  (Coastguard 
report). 
September 2001 01/293 
Two trainees and an instructor dived to 20m to conduct controlled 
buoyant lift practice.  One trainee lifted the other to 6m and then 
re-descended to repeat the exercise.  The lifts were slightly faster 
than normal.  They finally stopped at 6m for 6 min before 
surfacing.  18 hours after the dive one of the trainees experienced 
a 'twinge' in his knee.  This diver had suffered a trapped nerve in 
this knee 20 years earlier and it occasionally gave problems.  The 
following day the condition had worsened and he sought advice 
from a recompression facility.  He was advised to take a painkiller 
to see if it eased.  The pain remained and he was given a 
precautionary treatment.  The condition was not resolved. 
September 2001 01/300 
A diver surfaced, unconscious, from a dive to 42m.  A diver from 
another group, that was diving the same site, entered the water 
and recovered the casualty into their boat.  They started to 
resuscitate the casualty, alerted the Coastguard and rushed the 
casualty to the shore.  The casualty was taken to hospital where 
he was treated for DCI.  It is believed that the diver's BCD self-
inflated causing a rapid ascent. 
September 2001 01/296 
A pair of divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 41m.  
One of the pair forgot to fit his weightbelt.  After 20 min he noticed 
that he was very buoyant and becoming more so.  His buddy held 
on to him to prevent him from ascending.  The divers used a 
buddy line and deployed a delayed SMB to make their ascent.  
The ascent accelerated beyond control and the buoyant diver 
released the buddy line and ascended to the surface on his own.  
His buddy completed the required stops.  The buoyant diver was 
recovered into the boat and placed on oxygen.  The buddy was 
safely recovered after completing his decompression.  The 
buoyant diver then reported pains in his arm and numbness.  The 
Coastguard was alerted and the divers were flown by helicopter to 
a recompression facility.  The buddy also developed slight 
symptoms of DCI.  Both received decompression treatment and 
both made a full recovery. 
September 2001 01/315 
A diver suffering from DCI was flown by helicopter to a 
recompression facility.  (Newspaper report only) 
September 2001 01/463 
Rapid ascent following a dive to 54m - missing 17 min 
decompression.  Airlifted to hyperbaric unit for treatment.  
(Coastguard report). 
 
 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001 
16        ©BS-AC - 2001 
Injury / Illness 
 
October 2000 01/018 
A diver completed a 28 min dive to 30m. At a depth of 3m, he 
aborted the dive because he felt sick and thought that there was an 
air quality problem.  Once out of the water he was placed on oxygen 
and recovered after 15 min.  Subsequent analysis revealed no 
problems with the air. 
October 2000 01/013 
A diver experienced damage to his eyes during a dive.  He sought 
medical advice which prevented lasting effects of this injury.  It is 
thought that mask squeeze may have been the cause. 
October 2000 01/019 
Two divers dived to a maximum depth of 17m.  On their way back 
up, at a depth of 9m, one of the pair experienced a problem with his 
ear and began to panic.  They aborted the dive.  The diver with the 
problem had had a recent major ear infection.  He was advised to 
seek medical attention.  No other ill effects were reported. 
October 2000 01/033 
A diver was carrying a diving cylinder through the changing room of 
a swimming pool.  He was carrying the cylinder horizontally.  As he 
moved off of some anti-slip matting he fell.  The cylinder landed half 
on him and half on the ground.  The diver received a back injury 
and the cylinder pillar valve was damaged.  The diver was taken to 
hospital from where he was subsequently discharged with pain 
killers. 
October 2000 01/011 
Two divers were practicing air sharing between 15 and 6m.  At 9m 
one of the pair experienced a problem with her left ear.  Her buddy 
brought her to the surface using a controlled buoyant lift.  She 
sought medical advice and ear damage was confirmed. 
October 2000 01/031 
A diver completed a dive to 12m for 34 min.  1 hour 40 min later 
she dived again to 6m for 39 min.  Later that day she complained of 
an ear problem and felt dizzy and sick.  She was also very cold.  
She was taken to hospital and an ear infection was diagnosed.  
This problem responded to medical treatment. 
November 2000 01/040 
A diver slipped and fell face down on a landing stage.  Her left hand 
became very swollen.  An ambulance was called but she declined 
to go to hospital. 
November 2000 01/037 
An instructor and  five students were conducting a deep dive as 
part of a training course.  At 30m one of the students started to 
panic.  He felt as if he was 'breathing in metal and then water'.  He 
tried to breathe from his alternative air source but had the same 
problem.  He then shared air with the instructor who brought him 
safely to the surface.  The rest of the group made their way back up 
to 5m where they conducted a safety stop.  One of the group had 
difficulty controlling his buoyancy and moved up and down in the 
water.  In doing so he hurt his ear.  Once out of the water he 
experienced ear pain and a discharge from the ear.  He was taken 
by ambulance to hospital. 
November 2000 01/062 
A diver surfaced from a 32 min dive to 22m.  He conducted a 3 min 
stop at 6m.  At the surface he experienced difficulty in breathing.  
He sought medical advice and was taken to hospital.  No problem 
was found and he was discharged 1 hour later. 
November 2000 01/045 
Two divers completed a 22 min dive to a maximum depth of 20m.  
Upon surfacing they swam 100m to the shore.  At the shore one of 
the pair collapsed.  The diver was barely conscious.  He was given 
oxygen and slowly recovered.  A doctor attended and the casualty 
was taken to hospital by ambulance from where he was later 
discharged.  This diver had only one leg and it is thought that he 
may have become exhausted during the surface swim. 
November 2000 01/050 
Two divers made a dive to 35m for 15 min.  They made a slow 
ascent to 20m where they stayed for a further 10 min.  They then 
made a slow ascent to the surface over a period of 9 min.  Once out 
of the water both were well.  45 min later an incident occurred and 
these two divers ran to see if they could help.  Very soon afterwards 
one of the pair felt dizzy and was sick.  He was given oxygen.  He 
was taken by ambulance to hospital and then flown to a 
recompression facility where he was given precautionary 
recompression treatment. 
November 2000 01/055 
Two divers and an instructor were conducting a drill to practice an 
air sharing ascent.  Using an alternative air source they started at 
10m and planned to stop at 6m.  During the ascent they lost control 
of their buoyancy and continued up to 4m.  One of the pair then 
over-compensated and they both sank rapidly back to 10m.  At the 
bottom one of the pair experienced a problem with his ear as he had 
not cleared it during the rapid descent.  The instructor brought him 
towards the surface but the ascent became rapid and she released 
him at 5m.  He rose to the surface and she waited for the other 
diver and then completed a normal ascent.  At the surface the diver 
complained of ear pain.  It started to get better but 3 hours later the 
pain had returned and he went to hospital.  A badly bruised 
eardrum was diagnosed and the diver was advised not to dive for 3 
months. 
December 2000 01/064 
Whilst conducting training on weightbelt removal in the water a 
trainee received a cut to his right thumb. 
December 2000 01/069 
A snorkel diver entered a swimming pool using a stride entry.  As 
he hit the water the glass in his face mask shattered.  He received a 
bad cut to one of his fingers and had to seek hospital treatment.  A 
witness affirmed that the stride entry had been correctly performed. 
January 2001 01/071 
A diver undertook a 1hour 30 min flight.  12 hours later he dived.  
Later, after the dive, he felt unwell.  He sought medical advice and 
was taken to hospital.  He then left the hospital before being 
examined. 
 
January 2001 01/075 
A trainee diver undertook a dive with an instructor.  They 
progressed down a sloping bottom to a depth of 8m.  15 min into 
the dive the trainee suddenly experienced breathing problems.  The 
instructor used a controlled buoyant lift to bring him to the surface.  
He was brought ashore and given oxygen.  He was taken by 
ambulance to hospital and underwent a series of tests.  No 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC -2001   17 
problems were found but an X ray showed a pocket of gas in his 
stomach.  He was discharged from hospital.  It is thought that the 
diver may have been swallowing air whilst diving and that may have 
caused part of the contents of his stomach to have been 
regurgitated and inhaled. 
January 2001 01/072 
Two divers were conducting a dive at a depth of 20m.  One of the 
pair then tapped his buddy on the shoulder and indicated that they 
should ascend.  As they started to ascend the diver who had given 
the signal then lost consciousness.  His buddy brought him to the 
surface and towed him to the shore.  The total dive time was 12 
min.  The diver was taken to hospital where he recovered.  Medical 
tests were ongoing at the time of the report. 
January 2001 01/076 
A diver using a rebreather successfully completed a dive and shut 
down the set.  This diver and others were trying to recover some 
equipment from the water but some ropes became snagged 2 to 
3m below the surface.  The diver re-entered the water to free the 
ropes.  In his haste he failed to correctly switch on the rebreather's 
electronic control system.  He did not allow the electronic system to 
get past the calibration screen.  He was thus breathing 8% oxygen.  
He pulled himself down to the tangle and then returned to the 
surface.  At the surface he was seen to be in difficulties, apparently 
struggling to keep himself upright.  He struggled for about 10 
seconds and then, suddenly, fell deeply unconscious.  Others 
recovered him into the boat.  Oxygen was administered and the 
emergency services were called.  He was taken to hospital and 
recovered consciousness two days later and was reported as 
making a good recovery.  The diver had suffered from hypoxia. 
February 2001 01/088 
A trainee diver had a problem clearing his ears during a descent.  
At a depth of 14m he and his instructor decided to abort the dive.  
They ascended to the surface.  The trainee suffered a headache 
from which he recovered in an hour. 
February 2001 01/087 
An instructor and a trainee were 5 min into a dive at a depth of 10m.  
The trainee lost his regulator and started to panic.  The instructor 
took control and using his alternative air source, he brought the 
trainee to the surface.  At the surface the trainee was not breathing 
very well.  He was recovered from the water and placed on oxygen.  
An ambulance was called and the casualty, who had recovered a 
little, was taken to hospital for a check up. 
February 2001 01/097 
A diver completed a 20 min dive to 20m.  Upon surfacing he was 
found to have suffered from mask squeeze and had two black/red 
eyes.  He went to hospital and was discharged after an 
examination. 
 
March 2001 01/102 
A diver under training undertook the second dive of the day as part 
of a group of four.  At the end of the dive he had difficulty surfacing 
and, at 4m, he started to go back down and to swim away.  One of 
the other divers got to him and brought him quickly to the surface, 
missing planned safety stops.  The diver was very distressed and 
was placed on oxygen.  After 20 min he complained of tingling in 
his hands and forearms.  He was taken to hospital from where he 
later discharged himself. 
March 2001 01/103 
Four divers descended to a depth of 30m.  One of the divers' 
regulators began to free flow.  Another diver offered his alternative 
air source but this was pushed away.  The diver with the free flow 
then made an ascent to the surface without air.  His buddy went 
with him.  At the surface he was unconscious and not breathing.  
He was given oxygen and quickly recovered.  He was taken to 
hospital and discharged later that day. 
March 2001 01/114 
Two divers completed a 32 min dive to a maximum depth of 22m.  
At the surface they were so cold that they were unable to swim to 
the shore.  They were treated for hypothermia and recovered. 
March 2001 01/107 
Two divers completed two normal dives.  The first to 21m for 29 
min, and the second 1 hour 39 min later to 21m for 33 min.  1 hour 
later one of the pair started to get 'pins and needles' in both legs.  
She was very cold.  She was given oxygen and, as she warmed up, 
normal sensation returned.  She was advised to seek medical 
attention. 
March 2001 01/113 
Four divers were at a depth of 35m.  One of the group felt that she 
had water in her regulator and switched to her buddy's alternative 
air source.  At this point one of the divers' regulators began to free 
flow.  They made an ascent to the surface during which the diver 
who had had the initial regulator problem breathed a water air mix.  
At the surface she was distressed.  She was recovered from the 
water and placed on oxygen.  She complained of chest pain and 
was taken to hospital by ambulance.  Outcome not known. 
March 2001 01/166 
A trainee conducted her first shore dive.  The objective of the dive 
was to check buoyancy and to make two ascents.  The instructor 
and trainee successfully completed the first ascent and the 
instructor stated that they should go down again for a second 
ascent.  The trainee was unable to locate the inflation valve for her 
BCD and, whilst struggling to locate it, she knocked her own 
regulator from her mouth.  Water entered her mouth and she lost 
consciousness.  Visibility was low and the instructor lost contact 
briefly.  He located her on the seabed and brought her to the 
surface.  He towed her to the exit point and other members of the 
party removed her from the water.  She was not breathing.  
Resuscitation techniques were applied and the casualty quickly 
regained consciousness.  She was taken by ambulance to hospital 
and kept overnight for observation.  A full recovery was reported. 
 
 
March 2001 01/121 
A diver experienced a dislocated shoulder after a dive.  During 
medical examination blood was noticed coming from his right ear.  
His ear had been damaged during the dive and was possibly 
perforated. 
April 2001 01/345 
Diver suffering from hypoxia airlifted to hospital after using new re-
breather (on the surface - had not dived).  (Coastguard & RNLI 
report). 
April 2001 01/169 
A diver under training made a stride entry into a swimming pool.  

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001 
18        ©BS-AC - 2001 
His cylinder was not securely fastened and it struck the back of his 
head.  He was taken to hospital and stitches were required to close 
the wound. 
April 2001 01/140 
After a 27 min dive to 21m a diver experienced a painful ear.  The 
condition deteriorated quickly and he was taken to hospital by 
ambulance.  He was later discharged after treatment. 
April 2001 01/141 
A trainee was on her first open water dive, at a depth of 6m.  She 
began to panic and spat out her mouthpiece.  The instructor 
brought her safely to the surface using a controlled buoyant lift.  
She suffered a cut lip. 
April 2001 01/145 
After a 38 min training dive to 21m a diver complained of being very 
cold and feeling faint.  Once in a warm place he recovered.  This 
diver had not eaten and was very tired prior to the dive. 
April 2001 01/148 
Divers conducted a series of dives.  21m for 19 min with a 5 min 
stop at 5m.  1 hour 3 min later to 30m for 35 min with a 5 min stop 
at 5m.  1 hour 53 min later to 6m for 23 min.  One diver who had 
done two of these dives then complained of feeling light headed and 
was placed on oxygen for 15 min, after which she reported feeling 
well again.  Then a second diver reported a skin irritation on both 
arms.  He was given oxygen for 20 min and also reported a full 
recovery. 
April 2001 01/152 
An RHIB was traveling back to shore after a wreck dive.  The sea 
conditions were rough and on two occasions the boat landed 
heavily after hitting a swell.  Afterwards one of the divers 
complained of having hurt his back during one of the drops.  He did 
not participate in the second dive of the day. 
April 2001 01/172 
A trainee and instructor dived to a depth of 15m.  They then 
practiced various skills at 10m and 6m.  The instructor 
demonstrated a controlled buoyant lift on the trainee from 4m to the 
surface.  They then re-descended to 4m.  The trainee experienced 
severe pain in her left ear.  She signaled the problem and that she 
wanted to ascend.  Both divers ascended to the surface and left the 
water.  Once out of the water the trainee was sick.  She sought 
medical advice.  No problem could be found but some slight 
impairment of hearing remained and further medical examination 
was planned. 
 
 
April 2001 01/195 
A diver conducted his second dive of the day.  He dived to a 
maximum depth of 12m for 22 min.  After the dive he complained of 
a pain behind his eyes and the beginnings of a headache.  He was 
placed on oxygen.  Poor dive air quality was thought to have been 
the cause. 
May 2001 01/480 
Lifeboat launched to assist diver(s) with illness.  Two persons 
brought in.  (RNLI report). 
May 2001 01/285 
A diver and a trainee commenced a dive.  There was a slight 
current running and the dive leader indicated that they should move 
down to an underwater ledge.  He dived and then turned to check 
the trainee.  The trainee had not left the surface.  He returned and 
gave the trainee more weight.  He again dived towards the ledge.  
The trainee followed more slowly and experienced problems 
clearing his ears.  He indicated the problem to the dive leader.  At a 
depth of 6m the trainee began to inflate his BCD.  The dive leader 
took control and brought him to the surface.  They were recovered 
into their boat.  The trainee complained of ear pain but declined 
advice to seek medical attention.  The following day he was still in 
pain and reported to a hospital.  His ear was found to be bruised 
and swollen. 
May 2001 01/228 
A diver was standing on a poolside dismantling some diving 
equipment.  He inverted a BCD to drain water from it.  A 2kg weight 
fell from the BCD pocket and struck his toe.  The toe nail was 
dislodged.  First aid was given.  The toe was subsequently X-rayed 
and found to be broken. 
May 2001 01/380 
Shore diver suffered cramp, unable to make shore unaided, 
assisted by buddy and nearby diver.  (Coastguard & RNLI report). 
May 2001 01/220 
Two divers surfaced after a 35 min dive to 25m.  They completed a 
3 min stop at 6m, although this was not required by their dive 
computers.  At the surface one of the pair felt very cold as he had 
suffered a leaking drysuit zip.  The sea was choppy and he over 
inflated his BCD which caused squeeze on his chest.  This diver 
removed his mouthpiece to tell his buddy that he felt uneasy when a 
large wave washed over him.  He swallowed seawater and dropped 
his mouthpiece.  He reached for his buddy's alternative air source 
but was unable to get it into his mouth.  He started to panic and 
lifted his mask to try to resolve the problem.  He was then carried 
underwater again and swallowed more seawater.  The next thing 
that he remembers is being lifted into the boat.  He was placed on 
oxygen.  The Coastguard was alerted.  He was transferred to a 
faster boat and taken ashore to a waiting ambulance.  He was taken 
to hospital from where he was released later that day.  It was 
subsequently found that his hood had moved upwards covering his 
mouth and thus preventing him from using the regulator. 
June 2001 01/207 
A pair of divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 20m.  
Towards the end of the dive they planned to swim across a shelf at 
6m to serve as a safety stop.  During this swim one of the divers 
became distressed and surfaced. His total dive time was 30 min.  
He shouted for help and was quickly removed from the water.  The 
diver was distressed, had difficulty breathing and was unwell.  He 
was taken by ambulance to hospital where he was detained 
overnight. 
June 2001 01/392 
Buddy of a casualty who unfortunately had died on an earlier dive, 
reported as feeling unwell and computer went into 'SOS' mode.  
Oxygen administered and  casualty transferred to hospital for 
monitoring.  (Linked to 01/190)  (Coastguard report). 
June 2001 01/316 
A rebreather diver changed the CO2 absorbent in his rebreather.  
The following day he made a 51 min dive to 38m.  Six days later he 
used it to dive to 31m for 55 min.  The following day he dived to 
39m for 45 min.  During a decompression stop at 3m on the last 
dive he began to feel 'thick headed'.  His breathing became erratic.  
He felt weak when climbing a ladder to reboard the boat.  He 
breathed oxygen for 10 min.  That afternoon he felt exhausted.  
CO2 poisoning was postulated as the cause.  The absorbent was 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC -2001   19 
newly purchased.  The rebreather was stored on a boat and 
absorbent channeling due to vibration or efficiency reduction 
through dampness were proposed as possible causal factors. 
June 2001 01/233 
A fully kitted diver slipped on wet grass whilst walking near the 
entry point of a lake.  He received a sprained ankle.  After resting he 
was able to continue with his diving. 
June 2001 01/224 
A diver completed a navigation exercise and then acted as a 
casualty for a controlled buoyant lift from 8m.  He was towed for 
50m during which EAR was practiced.  During the tow the diver 
acting as the casualty inhaled some water and this made him 
cough.  They rested for a few minutes and then swapped over.  
After a few meters the diver who had had the coughing bout was 
unable to continue towing.  The other trainee and the instructor then 
started to tow him to the shore.  During the tow the diver became 
breathless and started to cough up blood.  An ambulance was 
called and the casualty was placed on oxygen.  The casualty was 
then taken to hospital and a chest X-ray indicated that he had 
suffered a ruptured alveoli capillary due to water inhalation. 
June 2001 01/203 
A diver was surfacing from a trimix dive to 32m.  He was 
conducting a decompression stop when a shoal of jellyfish were 
swept onto him.  He was switching regulators and was severely 
stung around the face and neck, and inside his mouth.  He was 
assisted into the boat and shortly afterwards began to show 
symptoms similar to DCI.  The Coastguard was alerted and after 
medical consultation a helicopter was tasked with airlifting the diver 
to hospital for urgent treatment.  He was not recompressed.  
(Coastguard report) 
June 2001 01/493 
Lifeboat launched to assist diver with illness.  One person brought 
in.  (RNLI report). 
June 2001 01/403 
Diver surfaced with head and eye pain.  Transferred to hospital for 
assessment.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/244 
Two divers were conducting a dive to 20m.  One of the pair 
developed a headache and began to feel sick.  They aborted the 
dive after 20 min.  The ill diver was placed on oxygen for 20 min 
and recovered.  It is believed that the air in the diver's cylinder may 
have been contaminated as it was filled by a compressor sited next 
to a main road during rush hour. 
July 2001 01/409 
Following medical advice, what were initially thought to be DCI 
symptoms were concluded to be due to alcohol/sea sickness.  
Medical treatment received - no recompression treatment required.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/245 
A trainee completed a 26 min dive to a maximum depth of 5m.  
During the dive he had no problems.  After the dive he had pain and 
bleeding from one ear.  He was advised to seek medical advice.  He 
did not have a cold. 
July 2001 01/246 
A diver conducted a dive to 6m for 30 min.  2 hours later she 
conducted another 30 min dive to 6m.  After this dive she 
complained of feeling sick and slightly dizzy.  She had a rash at the 
top of her legs.  She was placed on oxygen and diving medical 
advice was sought.  She was advised to attend the local hospital.  
The diver thought that it might be a reaction to food eaten the night 
before. 
July 2001 01/413 
Shore divers caught attention by waving flag, indicating distress.  
Diver suffering numbness, sickness and exhaustion was 
transferred to recompression chamber for treatment.  (Coastguard 
& RNLI report). 
July 2001 01/415 
Diver jumped into the water and developed chest pains - transferred 
to hospital for medical treatment.  (Described as being overweight 
a d unfit).  (Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/422 
Dive support vessel reported a diver suffering from chest pain 
despite following safe diving practice.  Airlifted to recompression 
chamber for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/282 
A diver completed a 30 min dive to a depth of 21m.  Upon surfacing 
blood was seen to be coming from his ear.  He was not aware of 
any problems during the dive.  He was taken to hospital. 
August 2001 01/429 
Diver on re-breather passed out on surfacing, following a dive to 
21m (thought to be oxygen starvation).  Oxygen administered and 
medical attention obtained.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/269 
An instructor and a trainee conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 
20m.  They started their ascent and at 16m, without warning, the 
trainee started to panic and rush to the surface.  The instructor 
managed to control the ascent.  At the surface the trainee was not 
breathing.  He was recovered from the water and quickly responded 
to resuscitation.  He was taken to hospital and released the 
following day. 
 
August 2001 01/268 
A student and an instructor were at 30m early in a dive.  The 
student indicated that he was out of air and the instructor gave him 
his alternative air source.  They started the ascent with other 
students.  At 5m the instructor saw that the student was going blue 
and quickened the ascent.  At the surface the alarm was raised and 
the student, who was unconscious, was placed on oxygen and 
resuscitation techniques were applied.  He started breathing again 
and was taken to hospital.  He was discharged 4 hours later.  His 
cylinder was found to contain 180 bar. 
August 2001 01/270 
An instructor and a trainee had finished their dive and were about to 
leave the water by a slipway.  Another trainee was entering the 
water and he turned around and threw himself backwards landing 
on top of the instructor from the first pair.  The instructor was 
struck on the head by the cylinder of the other diver and knocked 
unconscious.  The trainee with the instructor assisted him from the 
water with the help of others on the shore and the second trainee 
left to continue his dive.  The casualty was taken to hospital.  He 
was X rayed to determine if he had a fractured skull and a slight 
depression was found.  He required ten stitches to close the wound 
in his scalp and he then discharged himself from hospital. 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001 
20        ©BS-AC - 2001 
August 2001 01/439 
Breathing difficulties experienced by diver following a 25 m dive.  
Oxygen administered, no signs of DCI.  Subsequently transferred 
to hospital for monitoring and treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/284 
A diver was climbing the ladder to board a hardboat when her finger 
became trapped in a hinged part of the ladder.  The boat rolled, 
causing the hinge to close, and the top of her finger was severed.  
The finger was recovered and the diver was flown to hospital where 
the finger was grafted back.  At the time the hardboat was assisting 
with another diving incident.  (Linked to 01/283) 
August 2001 01/277 
A pair of divers made a 15 min dive to 20m.  Upon surfacing one 
was unconscious and the other felt unwell.  The Coastguard was 
alerted and a helicopter and a lifeboat were tasked to assist.  The 
lifeboat crew administered oxygen to the casualties until the 
helicopter arrived.  The divers were flown to hospital and the 
lifeboat assisted the boat back to the shore.  It is thought that the air 
in the divers' cylinders may have been contaminated with carbon 
monoxide.  The cylinders had been filled by a petrol driven 
compressor in a garage. 
September 2001 01/311 
A diver completed a 16 min dive to a depth of 27m.  Later he felt 
unwell, but recovered after 20 min. 
September 2001 01/307 
A diver dived to a depth of 22m.  During a gradual ascent he 
developed a pain in his left ear.  No subsequent ill effects were 
experienced. 
September 2001 01/305 
A diver undertook a dive to a depth of 10m.  Her ears felt swollen 
and seemed to be continually bubbling.  She suffered mild 
disorientation.  This diver suffered from eczema in her ears.  She 
was advised to seek medical attention. 
September 2001 01/310 
A diver completed a dive to a maximum depth of 28m for a duration 
of 48 min, including a 3 min stop at 6m.  40 min after surfacing she 
reported a loss of hearing in her right ear and disturbed balance.  
One hour later she had recovered. 
September 2001 01/302 
A trainee diver experienced problems with his ears at a depth of 
10m.  The dive was aborted.  At the surface he was sick and 
complained of pain in his ears. 
 
 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC -2001   21 
Boating & Surface Incidents 
 
 
October 2000 01/026 
A diver conducting a wreck dive became separated from the rest 
of his party.  The alarm was raised and two helicopters and two 
lifeboats undertook a search.  The diver was recovered safely from 
the surface, by a lifeboat, two and a half miles from his entry point.  
(Newspaper report only). 
October 2000 01/325 
A dive RHIB with 4 POB suffered engine failure and was towed 
into port by a local pleasure craft.  (Coastguard report). 
October 2000 01/319 
An RHIB with eleven people on board suffered engine failure.  The 
craft was swept onto  rocks and started to take on water.  The 
crew got onto the rocks.  The Coastguard was alerted and four 
lifeboats were tasked to assist.  A passing fishing boat went to 
assist.  This vessel collected all the crew and took the RHIB in 
tow.  All were safely returned to harbour. 
October 2000 01/007 
With two divers in the water the engine of an RHIB cut out.  The 
divers surfaced and swam to the boat.  The engine could not be 
restarted.  They radioed the Coastguard and a passing hardboat 
offered assistance.  They were safely towed back to harbour.  
Subsequent examination revealed a loose wire. 
October 2000 01/464 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  Craft 
towed in.  (RNLI report). 
October 2000 01/326 
A dive boat, with divers in the water, was reported broken down 
and in difficulties. A lifeboat recovered the divers and towed the 
dive boat in.  (Coastguard report). 
October 2000 01/327 
A fishing vessel came upon 2 drifting divers. It picked them up 
and returned them to their dive boat. The dive boat was anchored 
and unoccupied some 0.5 miles from the divers found position. 
Diving like this is dangerous practice.  (Coastguard report). 
October 2000 01/465 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  Craft 
towed in.  (RNLI report). 
October 2000 01/052 
A pair of divers made a dive to a maximum depth of 39m.  After 22 
min they began their ascent.  Each deployed an SMB and during 
the ascent they separated.  One of the divers surfaced after a total 
of 48 min.  He exchanged signals with the boat party and was 
picked up 10 min later.  The other diver experienced a failure of 
the regulator on his decompression gas cylinder.  He was using 
air as his dive gas and nitrox 38 for decompression.  He reverted 
to his air supply and recalculated his decompression 
requirements.  He released his SMB when it was jerked towards 
the surface by worsening sea conditions.  Without an SMB the 
boat party was unable to locate the diver.  They used their radio to 
make a Mayday call.  They received no reply.  They repeated the 
call, but, again, they did not receive a reply.  They then spotted the 
missing diver at the surface and recovered him safely.  They 
attempted to cancel the Mayday call.  On the way back to the 
shore they saw a lifeboat approaching.  They contacted the 
lifeboat, which was responding to their call and reported that the 
diver had been found.  No subsequent ill effects were 
experienced.  The radio had been successfully checked prior to 
leaving shore.  An aerial fault was suspected. 
November 2000 01/333 
Four divers in a RHIB were reported overdue. Prior to SAR action 
being taken, the RHIB returned safely.  (Coastguard report). 
December 2000 01/334 
A lifeboat was tasked to a capsized diving RHIB. On arrival all 
occupants were safely accounted for.  (Coastguard report). 
January 2001 01/335 
Two shore divers, one of which was unable to exit water due to 
sea conditions and exhaustion.  Rescued by ILB.  (Coastguard 
report). 
February 2001 01/339 
A dive RHIB suffered engine failure.  Towed in by lifeboat  
(Coastguard report). 
February 2001 01/338 
Broken down dive RHIB - towed to safety by nearby vessel.  
(Coastguard report). 
February 2001 01/337 
Dive RHIB suffered electrical failure whilst at anchor. Eight divers 
on board.  Six divers swam ashore to raise alarm and vessel towed 
to safety by nearby pleasure craft.  (Coastguard report). 
February 2001 01/238 
Two divers made a brief dive to assess the entry and exit from a 
dory.  Upon surfacing they passed equipment into the boat.  The 
cox did not indicate any problem but when the divers got back into 
the boat they found that it was rapidly filling with water.  One of the 
divers tried to motor the boat to get rid of the water but there was 
too much.  The cox was not wearing a dive suit.  The cox put on a 
buoyancy device and swam for the shore, which was near by.  The 
two divers attempted to secure the equipment before the boat 
became totally swamped.  A passer by called the emergency 
services and a lifeboat came to their assistance.  The cox was 
taken to hospital suffering from hypothermia.  The boat was 
recovered and it was found that the bungs were missing.  These 
had been in place as the start of the dive and it is thought that they 
had been removed during the dive in an attempt to drain water 
from the boat. 
March 2001 01/466 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  Craft 
towed in.  (RNLI report). 
March 2001 01/197 
Three divers were crossing a causeway having completed a shore 
dive.  They were swept off by the sea and their shore cover called 
the emergency services.  The divers were recovered by a boat and 
taken ashore. 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report -2001 
22  ©BS-AC - 2001 
March 2001 01/467 
Two lifeboats launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report). 
March 2001 01/469 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  Craft 
towed in.  (RNLI report). 
March 2001 01/470 
Two lifeboats assisted stranded diver(s).  (RNLI report). 
March 2001 01/468 
Two lifeboats launched to assist dive boat with engine problems 
and missing diver(s).  One person landed and craft escorted in.  
(RNLI report). 
March 2001 01/340 
Dive RHIB suffered fuel starvation - towed by ILB to Exmouth - 2 
POB. No VHF.  (Coastguard report). 
March 2001 01/471 
Lifeboat assisted stranded dive boat.  Craft towed in.  (RNLI 
report). 
March 2001 01/341 
Dive RHIB suffered engine failure - 6 POB. No radio carried on 
board.  (Coastguard report). 
 
 
 
Analysis of boating & surface incidents 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Bad seamanship
Boat problems
Lost divers
Engine problems
 
April 2001 01/342 
Suffering mechanical failure a dive RHIB was towed to safety by a 
LB and ILB.  (Coastguard & RNLI report). 
 
 
April 2001 01/343 
Diver reported buddy, her son, missing.  SAR units dispatched to 
search.  Diver located - and made shore safely.  (Coastguard 
report). 
April 2001 01/130 
A pair of divers entered the water in rough conditions.  14 min later 
a second pair also entered the water.  This second pair were 
recovered into the boat 26 min later but the first pair were nowhere 
to be seen.  The first pair had launched a delayed SMB at the time 
that the second pair were entering the water and it is thought that 
this distraction resulted in it not being seen.  Worsening weather 
conditions made the SMB hard to see.  The Coastguard was 
alerted and a lifeboat was launched.  Another dive boat came to 
assist.  This second boat discovered the missing divers safely at 
the surface.  Both boats and the lifeboat moved into sheltered 
water and the divers were all transferred into the lifeboat which 
towed their RHIB back to shore.  No ill effects were experienced. 
April 2001 01/344 
Broken down dive boat - assisted by another dive vessel.  Six 
persons on board.  (Coastguard report). 
April 2001 01/472 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  Craft 
towed in.  (RNLI report). 
April 2001 01/346 
Dive boat with one person on board was towed to safety by ILB.  
Three other divers from the craft had come ashore unaided.  
(Coastguard & RNLI report). 
April 2001 01/127 
A group of divers were recovering an RHIB at a slipway.  One 
diver was holding the boat at the water's edge.  The car was 
manoeuvering the trailer to reverse down the slipway when the 
trailer became disconnected from the car.  The trailer ran down 
the slipway, tow hitch first.  The diver in the water was alerted by 
shouts from others and just managed to jump out of the way.  The 
trailer struck the boat and one of the tubes was holed.  No one 
was injured. 
April 2001 01/475 
Three lifeboats launched to assist dive boat with engine problems 
and divers swept away.  Craft and crew brought in.  (RNLI report). 
April 2001 01/474 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  Craft 
towed in.  (RNLI report). 
April 2001 01/476 
Two lifeboats launched to assist divers, others coped.  (RNLI 
report). 
April 2001 01/347 
Dive boat suffered engine failure.  Four divers in water, one in boat 
- assisted by CG boat.  (Coastguard report). 
 
April 2001 01/348 
Ignition problems on dive RHIB - two divers in the water - divers 
picked up and RHIB towed to safety by passing vessel.  
(Coastguard report). 
April 2001 01/137 
Four divers rescued from difficulty in adverse conditions by ILB.  
Further 16 divers assisted to shore.  Weather conditions not 
conducive to diving.  Dangerous practice.  (Coastguard report) 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC -2001   23 
April 2001 01/182 
Two divers completed a wreck dive and surfaced.  They 
discovered that their boat was some way from their SMB which 
they had deployed before surfacing.  The divers signaled to the 
boat but it did not move towards them.  Whilst they had been 
diving the engine had been switched off and upon attempting to 
restart it the ignition key was broken.  An anchor was deployed 
and assistance sought by radio.  Another boat recovered the 
divers. 
April 2001 01/349 
Two shore divers rescued by ILB after being swept away by the 
tide and losing their bearings.  (Coastguard & RNLI report). 
April 2001 01/350 
Broken down dive boat - assisted by nearby craft. Managed to 
restart engine.  (Coastguard report). 
April 2001 01/477 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  Craft 
towed in.  (RNLI report). 
April 2001 01/352 
ILB rescued two shore divers who were unable to exit water due to 
adverse conditions.  (Coastguard & RNLI report). 
April 2001 01/478 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with fouled propeller.  Craft 
towed in.  (RNLI report). 
April 2001 01/354 
Dive RHIB - engine failure - towed in by passing vessel.  
(Coastguard report). 
April 2001 01/149 
Broken down dive boat (engine failure).  Lifeboat and ILB assisted 
with transporting six divers and boat to shore.  (Coastguard report) 
April 2001 01/358 
Dive RHIB became separated from 4 divers following failure of 
GPS.  Recovered by ILB.  (Coastguard & RNLI report). 
May 2001 01/479 
Lifeboat launched to assist divers, others coped.  (RNLI report). 
May 2001 01/359 
Diver separated from his buddy who was unable to locate him and 
raised the alarm.  Helicopter eventually located diver safe and well.  
(Coastguard report). 
May 2001 01/196 
An RHIB developed an engine problem with a pair of divers in the 
water.  Those in the boat deployed an anchor to slow their drift and 
contacted the Coastguard.  The divers surfaced to find the boat 
drifting away and out of hailing distance.  They attached 
themselves to the shotline and erected a flag.  A lifeboat was 
launched to assist.  The divers were recovered into the lifeboat 
and the RHIB was towed back to the shore. 
May 2001 01/362 
Dive RHIB broken down, towed to safety by lifeboat.  (Coastguard 
& RNLI report). 
May 2001 01/231 
A group of divers were diving from two RHIBs.  The last pair 
entered the water and the cox of one of the boats asked the other 
boat to pick up these divers so that the first boat could return to 
the shore with a very seasick passenger.  This conversation was 
not correctly understood and the second boat also returned to the 
shore.  The divers surfaced from a 35 min dive to 30m to find that 
there was no boat to meet them.  They made sure that their SMB 
was visible and waited.  The mistake was realised and the second 
boat returned to recover the divers after they had been at the 
surface for about 10 min. 
May 2001 01/364 
Report from dive boat which had broken down with fouled prop - 
six divers still in the water.  A nearby RHIB recovered the divers 
and towed the vessel to safety.  (Coastguard & RNLI report). 
May 2001 01/365 
Broken down dive RHIB towed safety to shore by Inshore Lifeboat.  
Six persons on board.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2001 01/185 
Three divers completed a dive and surfaced to find their boat 
about half a mile away traveling at speed away from them.  They 
inflated SMBs and used a whistle to try to attract the cox's 
attention, however they were not seen.  The three divers started to 
swim towards the shore.  They were spotted by another boat 
which recovered them and contacted the Coastguard to report that 
they had been found.  Their own RHIB then returned to collect 
them.  The divers had been using a SMB but the cox had lost 
sight of it.  The cox had alerted the Coastguard and a lifeboat that 
had been in the area was tasked to assist. 
May 2001 01/371 
Electrical fault in dive RHIB resulted in tow to safety by inshore 
lifeboat. Two persons on board.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2001 01/481 
Two lifeboats assisted a dive boat with engine failure and stranded 
diver(s).  Crew and craft returned to shore.  (RNLI report). 
May 2001 01/482 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  Craft 
towed in.  (RNLI report). 
 
 
May 2001 01/375 
Dive RHIB towed to safety by inshore lifeboat following 
breakdown.  (Coastguard & RNLI report). 
May 2001 01/373 
Two divers recovered from the water after becoming separated 
from their support vessel, which had broken down.  (Coastguard & 
RNLI report). 
May 2001 01/374 
Lifeboat towed dive RHIB to safety with four persons on board - 
vessel requested assistance following engine failure.  (Coastguard 
& RNLI report). 
May 2001 01/483 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  Craft 
towed in.  (RNLI report). 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report -2001 
24  ©BS-AC - 2001 
May 2001 01/376 
Reporting engine difficulties whilst returning from a dive site, 
assistance from a nearby lifeboat was declined.  Dive vessel made 
it to shore unaided.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2001 01/485 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  Craft 
towed in.  (RNLI report). 
May 2001 01/191 
A search involving a lifeboat and two dive boats was instigated 
after a diver was reported missing.  He was discovered 90 min 
later and safely recovered.  (Newspaper report only). 
May 2001 01/484 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  Craft 
towed in.  (RNLI report). 
May 2001 01/378 
Dive RHIB reported engine failure with three divers in the water.  
Assisted by nearby diving vessel and LB.  (Coastguard & RNLI 
report). 
May 2001 01/379 
Six divers became separated from their dive boat.  Assisted by 
nearby vessels and taken safely ashore. Numerous attempts to 
contact coxswain of the dive boat failed.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2001 01/381 
After surfacing, divers separated from dive boat.  Passing vessel 
picked them up and transferred back to dive party.  (Coastguard 
report). 
May 2001 01/382 
Broken down dive boat towed to safely by inshore lifeboat after 
suffering engine failure.  Six persons on board.  (Coastguard & 
RNLI report). 
May 2001 01/383 
Nearby vessel towed dive RHIB to safety with four persons on 
board following engine failure.  (Coastguard report). 
 
May 2001 01/232 
An RHIB with 6 divers aboard was moored to an anchor buoy over 
a wreck waiting for slack water.  A large dive charter boat 
approached them and moved up wind and up tide of their position.  
This vessel dropped a shotline and then drifted back onto the 
RHIB.  When this vessel was one meter from the RHIB it engaged 
forward propulsion and the anchor line of the RHIB was snagged 
in the large vessel's propeller.  The bows of the RHIB were pulled 
down and then the painter parted.  The skipper of the large boat 
apologized and invited the divers in the RHIB to use his shotline.  
All the divers entered the water.  Two divers from the RHIB 
deployed a delayed SMB to conduct decompression stops.  The 
shotline from the large vessel then parted; cut by abrasion on the 
wreck.  The divers in the RHIB recovered this line and returned it 
to the large vessel.  The large vessel then manoeuvered so close 
to the decompressing divers that they were able to see its rotating 
propeller and the remains of their line wound around it.  All divers 
were safely recovered. 
June 2001 01/386 
Distress call from dive boat reporting two missing divers. Divers 
SMB had caught on a shotline and abandoned, second SMB only 
partially inflated.  Both divers located safe and well by nearby 
vessel.  Both divers were well equipped, having strobe lights and 
torches ready to deploy when darkness arrived.  (Coastguard & 
RNLI report). 
June 2001 01/198 
A dive boat stood by to assist a yacht that had lost its rudder.  The 
crew of the yacht made a Pan Pan call to the Coastguard and a 
lifeboat was launched to tow them to harbour. 
June 2001 01/486 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  Craft 
towed in.  (RNLI report). 
June 2001 01/487 
Two lifeboats launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report). 
June 2001 01/192 
A dive boat skipper contacted the Coastguard to report that he had 
12 divers in the water and that his boat was taking in water.  A 
lifeboat and a helicopter were tasked to assist.  Three other dive 
boats also assisted.  These boats recovered the divers.  A pump 
was winched aboard the leaking boat and all were safely recovered 
to the shore. 
June 2001 01/223 
On the return journey from a dive site an RHIB ran out of fuel.  
The crew had difficulty connecting the fuel hose to the spare fuel 
tank.  The boat was drifting towards some rocks so the anchor 
was deployed.  Fuel was poured into the main fuel tank from a 
jerry can.  The engine was restarted and the boat continued.  The 
engine then cut out for a second time outside the harbour.  
Another boat towed them into the harbour.  It was subsequently 
found that the spare fuel can had contained diesel fuel.  The 
engine was subsequently successful run with the correct fuel. 
June 2001 01/489 
Lifeboat launched to assist swamped dive boat.  (RNLI report). 
 
June 2001 01/396 
Diver reported buddy missing following separation during ascent.  
SAR units tasked to locate the missing diver, who swam safely to 
shore during the search.  (Coastguard & RNLI report). 
June 2001 01/490 
Lifeboat assisted stranded dive boat. (RNLI report). 
June 2001 01/397 
Inshore lifeboat towed dive RHIB to safety with four persons on 
board - suffered from engine failure.  (Coastguard & RNLI report). 
June 2001 01/491 
Lifeboat launched to assist divers, two persons landed.  (RNLI 
report). 
June 2001 01/400 
Dive RHIB suffered damaged propeller shaft and was unable to 
retrieve their divers in the water.  ILB retrieved the divers and 
towed the RHIB to shore.  (Coastguard & RNLI report). 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC -2001   25 
June 2001 01/241 
With two divers in the water the engine of an RHIB failed.  The 
boat was anchored and the Coastguard was informed.  A lifeboat 
was tasked to assist.  They recovered the two divers and towed 
the RHIB into harbour. 
June 2001 01/243 
With three pairs of divers in the water an RHIB suffered an 
electrical failure and the engine stopped.  The engine would not 
restart and the fixed radio was without power.  A hand held radio 
was not able to reach the Coastguard.  The cox therefore fired two 
red flares.  A lifeboat attended and called a second boat.  The 
divers were safely recovered by the lifeboats and the RHIB was 
towed back to harbour. 
June 2001 01/216 
Two divers were reported missing after a wreck dive.  The 
Coastguard was alerted by another boat as the boat from which 
the divers were missing did not have a working radio.  The divers 
had been missing for 45 min before the alarm was raised.  The 
divers were safely recovered. 
June 2001 01/402 
Two divers adrift following dive RHIB engine failure.  Inshore LB 
picked up divers and returned to parent vessel.  (Coastguard & 
RNLI report). 
July 2001 01/318 
Two divers had completed their dive and were waiting at the top of 
the shotline.  A fast moving RHIB hit both divers.  One was hit on 
the arm and cylinder and the other on her shoulder and cylinder.  
The driver of the RHIB was seen to look back but did not stop.  
Both divers were safely recovered from the water and were not 
seriously injured. 
July 2001 01/259 
Two divers completed a dive to 28m for a total duration of 31 min, 
including a 1 min stop at 6m.  5 hours 11 min later they dived 
again, this time to 21m for a total duration of 37m.  No 
decompression stops were indicated during their ascent.  At 3m 
one of the pair felt sick.  At the surface she became very weak and 
was not able to hold onto the boat.  She was assisted back on 
board.  Her legs felt heavy and began to tingle.  Her lungs felt as 
though they were stretching.  She was placed on oxygen and 
taken to the shore.  The Coastguard was contacted by radio and 
the casualty and her buddy were taken by helicopter to a 
recompression facility.  The casualty was given three sessions of 
recompression treatment.  No predisposing factors were identified. 
July 2001 01/254 
An RHIB was returning from a dive site, at speed, with 5 persons 
on board.  This was the first time this boat had been used this 
year.  Prior to the trip preparatory work on the boat had revealed a 
problem with the emergency stop switch, which had been 
resolved.  The engine had been difficult to start but had then run 
for over 2 hours.  Without warning the engine cut out.  Attempts 
were made to restart the engine and the Coastguard were alerted.  
The engine could not be restarted and the Coastguard tasked an 
inshore lifeboat to assist.  Flares were used to guide the lifeboat to 
their position.  The boat was towed back to the shore.  Just as 
they reached the shore, they succeeded in restarting the engine. 
July 2001 01/494 
Lifeboat launched to assist divers, others coped.  (RNLI report). 
July 2001 01/252 
The Coastguard was alerted when two divers were 45 min overdue 
from a dive.  A helicopter and two lifeboats were tasked to search.  
The divers were safely recovered 5km from their boat.  
(Coastguard report) 
July 2001 01/495 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  Others 
coped.  (RNLI report). 
July 2001 01/424 
Assistance requested by dive RHIB following engine failure and 
reduced visibility.  Lifeboat towed 20 miles to safety.  Six persons 
on board.  (Coastguard & RNLI report). 
July 2001 01/496 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  Craft 
towed in.  (RNLI report). 
July 2001 01/258 
Two divers were driving an RHIB to a slip way to recover the boat.  
They approached a yacht and the people on the yacht shouted to 
them for assistance.  They noticed a body face down in the water, 
without a lifejacket.  They approached the casualty who was now 
recovering consciousness.  They recovered him into the boat and 
gave first aid treatment to a deep cut on his temple.  They 
contacted the Coastguard and took the casualty to the shore 
where they awaited an ambulance.  The casualty was taken to 
hospital and released the following evening.  He had been struck 
by the jib and knocked into the water unconscious.  The yacht had 
been unable to manoeuver close enough to pick him up.  They had 
thrown him a life preserver but he was not able to respond at the 
time. 
 
 
August 2001 01/434 
Dive RHIB reported engine failure with two divers in the water.  
LB/ILB assisted and recovered divers and towed RHIB to safety.  
(Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/435 
Following a large crack appearing in the hull, dive RHIB took on 
water and utilized pumps.  The vessel then ran out of fuel due to 
running of pumps.  Assistance provided by lifeboat and vessel 
towed to safety.  Divers were well prepared with appropriate safety 
equipment.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/433 
Dive boat with crew were swamped in adverse conditions.  Nearby 
vessel assisted in towing RHIB to safety.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/436 
Rescue boat towed broken down dive RHIB with six persons on 
board to safety - vessel had suffered gearbox failure.  (Coastguard 
report). 
August 2001 01/440 
Overdue dive RHIB report.  Vessel returned to shore safe and 
well, prior to deployment of SAR units.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/290 
An RHIB was returning from a dive at a speed of approximately 20 
knots.  The oil warning alarm began to sound intermittently.  The 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report -2001 
26  ©BS-AC - 2001 
engine was stopped and the alarm was investigated.  The oil tank 
was found to contain oil and the system seemed to be in good 
order.  Water ingress was suspected.  They continued their 
journey.  5 min later the alarm began to sound continuously and 
the engine note changed.  The engine was shut down.  A cut was 
found in the oil supply line and the divers felt that the engine would 
be at risk from any temporary repair.  They made a Pan Pan call 
and a private motor yacht came to their assistance.  They were 
safely towed ashore. 
August 2001 01/441 
Dive boat requested assistance from a nearby vessel reporting 
that she had suffered engine failure.  Attempts to repair engine 
were unsuccessful and crew of four were taken aboard assisting 
vessel and duly returned to shore later.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/448 
Two divers, separated from their boat, were picked up by passing 
dive RHIB and returned to their vessel.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/447 
Dive RHIB reported running out of fuel following a leak. Broadcast 
made and assistance rendered by nearby vessel which supplied 
fuel for a safe return to shore.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/450 
Engine failure of dive boat resulted in drifting from dive site.  
Consequently, two divers became separated from the boat upon 
surfacing.  Divers drifted two miles up tide due to time lapse in 
calling for assistance.  SAR units deployed - divers found safe.  
(Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/451 
Lifeboat stood by to assist a dive vessel that had broken down.  
Vessel managed to restart engine and made its way back to 
launch site.  (Coastguard report). 
 
 
 
Boating& surface incident report source analysis 
1778
60
7
BSAC Reports (17) Coastguard (78)
RNLI (60) Newspaper (7)
 
September 2001 01/454 
Inshore lifeboat tasked to assist four divers who had been 
separated from dive RHIB.  Divers safely recovered by parent 
vessel.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2001 01/294 
Divers were decompressing at a depth of 4m when several large 
powerboats, that were engaged in a race, passed over the top of 
them.  The attending dive boat was displaying three A flags and 
the dive boat skipper attempted to position his boat to protect the 
divers.  Those on the dive boat signaled the powerboats to stay 
clear, one of the powerboat drivers responded with a rude gesture.  
No injuries were sustained. 
September 2001 01/455 
Dive boat with five divers aboard reported machinery failure.  ILB 
launched to assist but a nearby vessel towed the craft to safety 
prior to ILB arrival.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2001 01/456 
Inshore lifeboat tasked following a report of three divers cut off by 
the tide on an island close to the mainland.  Divers had been 
swept by the tide onto the island - one of them had broken a fin 
and would have been unable to make shore unaided.  Divers 
returned to the mainland by the ILB and re-joined the other 
members of their diving party.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2001 01/459 
Dive RHIB called for assistance following engine failure and taking 
in water.  Inshore lifeboat towed stricken vessel back to shore.  
(Coastguard report).  
September 2001 01/461 
Two divers missing following a drift dive (SMB carried).  Located 
safe and well by dive RHIB.  (Coastguard report). 
 
 
September 2001 01/460 
Report by dive support vessel of two missing divers resulted in 
mobilization of SAR units.  Both divers located safe and well by 
lifeboat.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2001 01/299 
A diver failed to return to the surface as expected.  The dive boat 
had no VHF radio and the mobile phone that they had did not work 
in the area of the incident.  The boat returned to the shore to raise 
the alarm.  The Coastguard initiated a search.  Numerous fishing 
vessels and a helicopter sought the missing diver.  He was located 
by Forward Looking Infra-Red equipment on the helicopter 2 hours 
before nightfall and safely recovered.  The diver reported that 
several fishing vessels had passed close to him but, with no 
surface detection aids, he could not attract their attention.  
(Coastguard Report) 
September 2001 01/444 
Inshore lifeboat towed dive vessel to safety after it suffered 
mechanical breakdown.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2001 01/462 
Report by a dive RHIB of an unattended diver in the water.  Vessel 
stood by until parent RHIB located and diver picked up.  
(Coastguard report). 
 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC -2001   27 
Ascents 
 
October 2000 01/008 
A diver was conducting a dive at a depth of 17m when he started 
to feel uncomfortable.  His mask started to flood and he began to 
panic towards the surface.  His buddy attempted to steady him but 
they made a fast ascent to the surface.  Their dive time was 10 
min.  The panicked diver was given oxygen and suffered no 
subsequent ill effects. 
October 2000 01/014 
Two divers completed a dive to 24m for 34 min.  They were 
conducting a stop at 6m when, after 1 min, one of the pair lost 
control of his buoyancy and dropped back down to 14m.  He then 
made a fast ascent to the surface.  No subsequent problems were 
reported. 
October 2000 01/012 
After a 22 min dive to 20m a diver experienced problems with air in 
her drysuit and made a fast ascent from 6m.  No subsequent ill 
effects were experienced. 
October 2000 01/030 
Two divers were conducting an air sharing exercise at a depth of 
18m under the supervision of a third person.  One of the pair 
started to panic and made a rapid ascent to the surface.  No 
subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
November 2000 01/063 
Two divers completed a dive to a maximum depth of 36m.  One of 
the pair lost control of his buoyancy at 6m and rose to the surface 
missing decompression stops.  His buddy followed.  No 
subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
November 2000 01/039 
At a depth of 18m a diver got a mouthful of water and started to 
panic.  Her buddy brought her to the surface.  They made a faster 
than normal ascent.  Their maximum depth had been 22m and the 
dive duration was 16 min.  No subsequent ill effects were 
experienced. 
November 2000 01/032 
A diver was conducting a deep dive to 32m as part of a training 
course.  On the way back up, at a depth of 22m, he was low on 
air.  He attempted to use his buddy's alternative air source but 
didn't clear the regulator.  He panicked and made a fast ascent to 
the surface.  It is thought that he might have suffered from 
nitrogen narcosis.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
November 2000 01/044 
A diver made a first dive in the UK and her first in a drysuit.  At 
20m she lost control of her buoyancy and made a fast ascent to 
the surface.  Her buddy also made a fast ascent.  No subsequent 
ill effects were experienced. 
November 2000 01/046 
A diver was 9 min into a dive at a depth of 17m when he lost 
control of his buoyancy and made a rapid ascent to the surface.  
The maximum dive depth was 19m.  The diver stated that the 
inflation unit of his BCD had developed a fault.  He was given 
oxygen and experienced no subsequent ill effects. 
November 2000 01/049 
A trainee was conducting buoyancy control drills in a depth of 7m.  
She breathed in water and panicked.  She made a fast ascent to 
the surface.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
December 2000 01/061 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 22m.  They 
moved up from 18 to 12m.  One of the pair lost control of his 
buoyancy and made a rapid ascent to the surface.  He was 
wearing a semi-drysuit.  The following day he had a knee pain but 
it was believed to have been due to an earlier injury. 
December 2000 01/070 
A diver was at a depth of 33m when the regulator of his alternative 
air source started to free flow.  He and his buddy ascended up a 
slope to 28m and then made an ascent directly to the surface.  
The ascent was fast and at the surface the diver with the free flow 
had difficulty breathing and started to panic.  Total dive time was 
11 min.  An hour later he was fine and no subsequent ill effects 
were reported. 
December 2000 01/074 
A diver completed a 32 min dive to a maximum depth of 7m.  2 
hours 30 min later she dived again to 20m.  5 min into the dive she 
had difficulties with buoyancy control and made a rapid ascent to 
10m.  She regained control during the final 10m to the surface.  
After the dive she suffered from a nose bleed, but was otherwise 
unhurt. 
January 2001 01/073 
Two divers were conducting a dive at a depth of 21m when the 
regulator of one of the pair began to free flow.  He tried to use his 
buddy's alternative air source but was not able to clear it.  He 
began to panic and made a fast ascent to the surface.  No 
subsequent ill effects were reported. 
January 2001 01/118 
An  instructor and two trainees were at a depth of 15m when the 
regulator of one of the trainees began to free flow.  He was offered 
an alternative air source by one of the other divers but they 
became separated.  The diver with the free flow realised that he 
was low on air and made a fast ascent to the surface.  No 
subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
February 2001 01/094 
Two divers descended to a depth of 15m.  At this point the 
regulator of one of the pair began to free flow.  She made a fast 
ascent from 10m.  At the surface she was sick and very shaken.  
No further problems were experienced. 
February 2001 01/157 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 28m.  They 
began their ascent when one of the divers had 70 bar remaining. 
At 19m one of their computers indicated that they had 2 min of no 
stop time remaining.  The diver with 70 bar struggled to control his 
buoyancy.  He tried to control both his drysuit and his BCD.  He 
became very negatively buoyant and sank back down to the 
seabed at 23 m.  His buddy went after him and helped him to 
control his buoyancy.  At 14m the troubled diver lost control again 
and made a fast ascent to the surface.  His total dive duration was 
37 min.  The other diver completed a 9 min stop at 3m, as 
indicated by his computer.  The buoyant diver was recovered into 
the boat and placed on oxygen for 15 min.  No subsequent ill 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report -2001 
28  ©BS-AC - 2001 
effects were experienced. 
February 2001 01/096 
Two divers conducted a night dive to a maximum depth of 19m.  
The regulator of one of the pair began to free flow.  He switched to 
his alternative air source.  He became lost and made a rapid 
ascent to the surface.  His buddy surfaced in a shocked state.  
Both divers were given oxygen, and no subsequent ill effects were 
experienced.  Total dive duration 20 min. 
February 2001 01/119 
Two divers were 15 min into a dive at a depth of 30m.  The 
regulator of one of the pair began to free flow and they made a fast 
ascent to the surface.  No subsequent ill effects were 
experienced. 
March 2001 01/098 
A diver was one of four trainees with an instructor.  They dived to 
17m conducting a drysuit dive as part of an advanced course.  
The trainee felt uncomfortable and began to panic.  He made a 
fast ascent and was unconscious briefly at the surface.  He was 
very sick.  He had been eating shortly before the dive.  He was 
given a medical examination and found to be alright. 
March 2001 01/100 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 21m.  At 20m 
the regulator of one of the pair began to free flow.  They managed 
a controlled ascent to 11m at which point the ascent became very 
fast.  Dive duration 8 min.  No subsequent ill effects were 
experienced. 
March 2001 01/122 
Two divers completed a dive to 32m.  After 20 min they started 
their ascent.  One of the pair attempted to switch to nitrox 32 at 
18m, but the regulator did not seem to be working correctly and he 
switched back to his main regulator.  He examined the nitrox 
regulator and it started to free flow.  Neither he nor his buddy 
could prevent the free flow and in the confusion of bubbles they 
sank back to the seabed, at a depth of 27m.  The diver with the 
free flow saw that he only had 30 bar remaining in his main 
cylinder, and he started to breathe from his buddy's alternative air 
source.  This regulator was tugged from his mouth and he took a 
mouthful of water.  He took a tighter grip on the regulator.  Both 
divers ditched bags of scallops which they were carrying and this 
made them positively buoyant.  They made a rapid ascent to the 
surface.  The divers were recovered into their boat and placed on 
nitrox 72 and 73.  Their computers indicated that they had missed 
10 min of decompression stops and that they had ascended from 
27m in 1 min.  The Coastguard was alerted and a helicopter was 
tasked to assist.  Both divers were airlifted and placed on oxygen.  
They were taken to a recompression facility and received a 5 hour 
treatment.  Both were released from hospital the following day and 
neither suffered any symptom at any time. 
March 2001 01/105 
An instructor was assessing two trainees.  The three gathered at 
the bottom of a shotline at a depth of 15m.  They planned to 
practice the use of an alternative air source from 15 to 6m.  One of 
the trainees removed his mouthpiece and indicated 'out of air'.  
The other trainee offered his alternative air source but they had 
become separated and the first diver was left without a regulator.  
The instructor gave this diver his alternative air source, he then 
located the diver's own regulator and returned it to him.  In the 
mean time the other trainee's regulator began to free flow and he 
was unable to breathe from it.  He started a free ascent.  The 
instructor swam after him, but was unable to vent air from his 
drysuit and made a fast buoyant ascent.  At the surface the alarm 
was raised.  The second trainee made a normal ascent up the 
shotline.  The first trainee was placed on oxygen.  All the divers 
were kept under observation but no subsequent ill effects were 
experienced.  The water temperature was 4 deg C. 
March 2001 01/117 
A diver experienced a regulator free flow, 4 min into a dive, at a 
depth of 18m.  He made a fast ascent.  No subsequent ill effects 
were reported. 
March 2001 01/116 
Three divers commenced a deep training dive.  At 17m one of the 
group experienced a problem with his face mask and swallowed 
water.  He was unable to resolve the problem.  The dive was 
aborted and he ascended, faster than normal, with the instructor.  
No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
March 2001 01/120 
Two divers completed a 26 min dive to a maximum depth of 23m.  
Towards the end of the dive they became disorientated, and 
confused.  They lost buoyancy control and made a fast ascent to 
the surface.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
April 2001 01/123 
The Coastguard was alerted after a diver made a rapid ascent.  A 
lifeboat and a helicopter were tasked to assist and the diver was 
airlifted to a recompression facility.  The diver was reported to 
have escaped injury.  (Coastguard report) 
April 2001 01/138 
A pair of divers were surfacing after a dive to 22m.  One of the pair 
was using a reel and line.  This diver lost control of his buoyancy 
and made a fast ascent to the surface from 17m.  Dive duration 25 
min.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
April 2001 01/139 
A pair of divers were surfacing after a dive to 20m.  One of the pair 
was using a new drysuit.  This diver lost control of his buoyancy 
and made a fast ascent to the surface from 10m.  Dive duration 24 
min.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
April 2001 01/142 
Two divers were surfacing after a 33 min dive to 22m.  One of the 
pair lost control of his buoyancy and made an uncontrolled ascent 
to the surface, missing a 3 min decompression stop at 3m.  No 
subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
April 2001 01/143 
Two divers completed a 26 min dive to 21m.  At 6m they deployed 
a delayed SMB and one of the pair switched to a 3l cylinder which 
was thought to contain her decompression gas.  This cylinder was 
found to be empty.  She switched back to her main regulator 
which then began to free flow.  She became tangled in the buoy 
line and made a fast ascent to the surface.  No subsequent ill 
effects were experienced. 
April 2001 01/144 
Two divers were ascending from a 29 min dive to 36m.  At 6m one 
of the pair lost control of his buoyancy and made a fast ascent to 
the surface, missing a planned 3 min decompression stop.  No 
subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
April 2001 01/146 
Two divers were ascending from a 26 min dive to 35m.  At 20m 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC -2001   29 
one of the pair lost control of his buoyancy, with air in his drysuit 
boots, and made a fast ascent to the surface, missing a planned 
12 min decompression stop.  No subsequent ill effects were 
experienced. 
April 2001 01/147 
A group of three divers were ascending from a 26 min dive to 
21m.  At 15m one of the group ran out of air.  She attempted to 
take the alternative air source of one of the other divers but was 
unable to clear the mouthpiece, as she did not know how to purge 
it.  She panicked and all three made a rapid ascent to the surface.  
No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
April 2001 01/150 
A diver under training had dived to 10m for 9 min when he 
surfaced, rapidly, in distress, with his buddy.  The buddy 
summoned the boat and the distressed diver was recovered from 
the water.  Once in the boat he recovered and was later taken for a 
medical check up. 
April 2001 01/353 
Two divers missed stops during ascent.  No DCI symptoms.  
Transferred to recompression chamber, treatment administered.  
(Coastguard report). 
April 2001 01/170 
Two divers were ascending after a 25 min dive to a maximum 
depth of 21m.  One of the pair turned quickly and his mask came 
off.  He made a fast ascent to the surface.  His buddy made a 
normal ascent.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
April 2001 01/357 
Following a rapid ascent diver transported to hospital for 
observation.  (Coastguard report). 
April 2001 01/173 
Two divers were 7 min into a dive to a maximum depth of 12m.  At 
7m the regulator of one of the pair began to free flow.  He made a 
rapid ascent to the surface.  The diver had cramp in his right knee 
and complained of feeling tired.  No subsequent ill effects were 
reported. 
May 2001 01/174 
A group of three divers were 10 min into a dive at a depth of 21m.  
The regulator of the alternative air source of one of the divers 
began to free flow.  This diver then began to breathe in water from 
her main regulator.  Her buddy gave her their alternative air source 
and they made a rapid ascent to the surface.  No subsequent ill 
effects were experienced. 
 
May 2001 01/175 
Two divers completed a dive to 29m for a duration of 29 min.  
Upon surfacing they noticed that one of their dive computers was 
flashing 'SOS'.  They sought advice on the meaning of this and 
were advised that they must have made a fast ascent.  They were 
also advised not to dive again that day, but one and a half hours 
later they conducted a second dive. 
May 2001 01/159 
Following a fast ascent a diver was transferred to DDRC for 
treatment.  (Coastguard report) 
May 2001 01/367 
Following separation from dive buddy, diver made a rapid ascent.  
Given oxygen and airlifted to hospital.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2001 01/369 
Following a 35m wreck dive - diver complained of suspected bad 
air and also missed some stops.  Airlifted to recompression 
chamber.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2001 01/176 
Two divers dived to a maximum depth of 30m.  One of the pair ran 
low on air so they started their ascent.  During the ascent they 
started to share air and the diver who was low on air then lost a fin.  
They made a fast ascent to the surface.  Total dive duration 39 
min.   No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
May 2001 01/177 
A pair of divers were ascending from a dive to 36m.  At 20m one 
of the pair started to feel uneasy.  At 10m she felt that she was not 
getting enough air and took her buddy's alternative air source.  
They made a faster than normal ascent to the surface.  Dive 
duration 11 min.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
May 2001 01/370 
Female diver airlifted to hospital following rapid ascent. Thought to 
be due to bad air or diabetes.  (Coastguard & RNLI report). 
May 2001 01/178 
Two divers were ascending from a dive to 20m.  At 6m they lost 
control of their buoyancy and made a faster than normal ascent to 
the surface.  Dive duration 20 min.  No subsequent ill effects were 
experienced. 
May 2001 01/201 
A diver conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 33m.  She was 
using a new thicker undersuit and a new drysuit.  The latter part of 
the dive involved a swim along the upturned hull of a wreck.  
During this swim the diver became buoyant and, with nothing to 
hold onto, made a rapid ascent to the surface.  Her computer 
showed an ascent warning but no missed stops.  Her buddy made 
a normal ascent.  The buoyant diver was recovered into the boat 
and placed on oxygen for 10 min.  No subsequent ill effects were 
experienced. 
May 2001 01/168 
A diver made an ascent at the end of his dive.  At 10m he stopped 
and became tangled in surface marker buoy lines.  He then made 
a rapid ascent to the surface.  He was recovered into his boat and 
the Coastguard alerted.  He was taken ashore and then taken by 
helicopter and ambulance to a recompression facility for 
examination.  (Coastguard report) 
May 2001 01/181 
Two divers conducted a wreck dive to a maximum depth of 27m.  
Visibility was low and they attached a distance line to the shotline 
so that they could return.  They planned to ascend with 5 min of 
no stop time remaining.  They returned to the shot but took some 
time to disconnect the distance line due to extremely low visibility.  
They deployed a delayed SMB and started their ascent with a 1 
min stop at 3m indicated.  This stop requirement went away by the 
time they reached 10m.  At 8m one of the pair lost control of his 
buoyancy and made a rapid ascent to the surface.  His computer 
showed that a 5 min stop at 3m had been missed.  The dive 
duration was 29 min.  Back in the boat he was placed on oxygen 
for 50 min.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced.  It was 
suggested that the diver's undersuit prevented air escaping from 
the drysuit vent valve. 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report -2001 
30  ©BS-AC - 2001 
June 2001 01/387 
Rapid ascent following loss of weightbelt from 36m (one diver).  
Medical advice obtained - transferal to hospital.  (Coastguard 
report). 
June 2001 01/217 
A diver completed a 35 min dive to 19m and surfaced with a tissue 
code of G.  1 hour 30 min later he dived to a maximum depth of 
21m.  He planned a stop at 6m but lost control of his buoyancy 
and made an ascent to the surface missing stops.  Total dive time 
15 min.  He suffered no subsequent ill effects. 
June 2001 01/257 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 28m.  During 
the ascent they stopped to allow their computers to clear.  One 
diver's computer cleared, the other's showed 2 min remaining.  
The diver with the clear computer was holding the delayed SMB 
reel and may have re-descended a little whilst waiting.  Once the 
second computer cleared they ascended to the surface.  At the 
surface the first diver's computer now showed missed 
decompression stops.  No symptoms were present and the diver 
did not dive for the next 24 hours. 
June 2001 01/393 
Rapid ascent from 36m (one diver).  Medical advice obtained - 
transferal to hospital.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2001 01/239 
A diver conducted a dive to 37m.  At 20m he suffered a jammed 
cuff dump and made a rapid ascent to the surface missing 
decompression stops.  The dive duration was 23 min. 
June 2001 01/390 
Dive computers belonging to 3 divers displayed rapid ascent from 
31m.   Divers showed no symptoms and following medical advice, 
no action was taken.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2001 01/209 
A pair of divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 17m.  
One of the pair experienced buoyancy control problems and his 
depth varied between 12 and 17m.  He then made a fast ascent to 
the surface.  Total dive duration 15 min.  No subsequent ill effects 
were reported. 
June 2001 01/260 
A diver planned to dive to 28m using a 15l main cylinder, a 3l air 
pony cylinder and a 3l nitrox 50 pony cylinder.  He planned to use 
the nitrox as the decompression gas, for added safety against 
DCI.  As he entered the water the nitrox cyclinder became 
detached from his main cylinder, he passed this cylinder back into 
the boat and continued the dive without it.  He did not readjust his 
weights.  28 min into the dive the diver and his buddy were at 22m 
and launched a delayed SMB to begin their ascent.  The diver's 
computer indicated a 15 min ascent time with stops at 3m.  They 
stopped for 1 min at 9m and 2 min at 6m.  The computer now 
indicated an 8 min ascent time.  At this point the diver lost control 
of his buoyancy and ascended directly to the surface.  He tried to 
re-descend but was not able to do so.  He waited for his buddy 
and was then recovered into the boat.  He breathed the nitrox 50 
and refrained from further diving that day.  He suffered no ill 
effects. 
June 2001 01/212 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 20m.  One of 
the pair experienced a problem with his mask flooding and they 
made a faster than normal ascent to the surface.  Total dive time 8 
min.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
June 2001 01/211 
Two pairs of divers undertook a dive to a maximum depth of 35m.  
At this depth the regulator of one of the divers began to free flow.  
He tried to use his own alternative air source but it too began to 
free flow.  He took the alternative air source of his buddy and they 
made a fast ascent to the surface.  The other pair went with them.  
Total dive duration 15 min.  No subsequent ill effects were 
experienced. 
June 2001 01/253 
A diver completed a 37 min dive to 21m with a 2 min safety stop at 
6m.  6 hours 43 min later she dived again to a maximum depth of 
17m.  The second dive was a drift dive.  After 20 min she and her 
buddy were at a depth of 15m.  The buddy signaled ascent.  The 
diver then struggled to correct a feet up attitude.  Her buddy 
attempted to help but she was too buoyant and rose directly to the 
surface.  The buddy managed to stop at 3m and surfaced later in 
a controlled manner.  Both were recovered into their boat and the 
diver who had made the rapid ascent was placed on oxygen.  
Once on shore medical advice was sought via the Coastguard.  
With no symptoms present no further action was recommended. 
July 2001 01/408 
After missing decompressions stops following a 52m dive, two 
divers, fortunately, did not require recompression.  They were, 
however, monitored for any further symptoms.  (Coastguard 
report). 
July 2001 01/414 
Two divers who made a rapid ascent, but displaying no DCI 
symptoms, were transferred by ambulance to the recompression 
chamber for assessment.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/267 
A diver dived to a maximum depth of 35m using nitrox 24.  He 
planned a total dive time of 70 min.  32 min into the dive he started 
his ascent.  During the ascent his drysuit dump valve stuck closed 
and he made a buoyant ascent to the surface.  He was believed to 
have missed 35 to 40 min of decompression stops.  The 
Coastguard was alerted and the diver was taken by helicopter to a 
recompression facility.  He was recompressed and experienced no 
subsequent ill effects. 
July 2001 01/250 
Two divers made a dive to 20m.  2 hours later they dived again.  
This second dive was to 37m.  They descended a shotline to the 
wreck and conducted their dive.  After 18 min they began their 
ascent using a delayed SMB.  At 6m they stopped but then sank 
down again to 21m.  One of the divers used his BCD to regain 
buoyancy and they ascended again.  They were unable to stop at 
6m and rose directly to the surface missing an indicated 4 min 
decompression stop.  One of the divers had blood coming from 
her nose.  They were recovered into their boat and the diver who 
was bleeding was placed on oxygen.  The Coastguard was notified 
and the RHIB returned quickly to the shore.  They were met by 
Coastguards and two ambulances.  Both were treated for a 
potential DCI and were released fully fit the following day. 
July 2001 01/247 
A diver made a 27 min dive to 26m.  1 hour 40 min later he dived 
again to 22m.  He lost control of his buoyancy at 15m and decided 
to abort the dive.  He made a fast ascent to the surface.  He was 
shaken but otherwise unhurt. 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC -2001   31 
July 2001 01/251 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 39m.  When 
one of the pair had 70 bar remaining they began their ascent.  The 
other diver had 150 bar.  They used a delayed SMB.  During the 
ascent the diver who was low on air took the alternative air source 
of the other diver.  They conducted a 10 min stop at 6m, then the 
second diver became low on air and signaled the ascent.  The first 
diver used his own regulator again and the second diver made a 
fast ascent to the surface.  The computer of the diver who had 
made the rapid ascent indicated missed stops, the other was 
clear.  Both were recovered into the boat and the diver who had 
made the rapid ascent was placed on oxygen.  They contacted the 
Coastguard and medical advice was sought.  No symptoms were 
present in either diver and no further action was recommended. 
July 2001 01/419 
VHF call from dive boat reporting diver having made rapid ascent.  
No oxygen on board.  Transferred to DDRC for treatment.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/425 
Two divers who made a rapid ascent were transferred by 
ambulance to the recompression chamber for observation.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2001 01/427 
Decompression stop missed by two divers and oxygen 
administered by dive boat.  Diver transferred to recompression 
facility for assessment.  (Coastguard report). 
 
 
July 2001 01/263 
A pair of divers were 23 min into a dive at a depth of 20m.  At this 
point the alternative air source hose of one of the pair suddenly 
ruptured at the point where it entered the second stage valve.  
There was a loud bang and the diver was enveloped in bubbles.  
The diver switched to his pony regulator and his buddy turned off 
his main cylinder.  During the confusion he had risen a few metres 
and he become inverted.  He and his buddy tried to slow the 
ascent but he was carried to the surface.  He was recovered into 
the boat and placed on oxygen.  No subsequent ill effects were 
experienced. 
July 2001 01/271 
A pair of divers had dived to a maximum depth of 35m.  At 25m 
one of the pair lost control of his drysuit buoyancy and made a fast 
ascent.  The dive duration was 10 min.  No subsequent ill effects 
were experienced. 
August 2001 01/431 
Medical advice obtained for diver who had made a rapid ascent 
from a wreck dive. Diver monitored but no medical treatment 
required.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/432 
On completion of dive, diver ran out of air during ascent.  Air 
shared with buddy, who also ran out of air at 10m.  Rapid ascent 
carried out.  Oxygen administered after one diver complained of 
aching legs.  Medical advice recommended immediate evacuation 
to recompression chamber.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2001 01/449 
Medical assistance required for female diver and buddy following a 
rapid ascent from a wreck dive.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2001 01/308 
Two divers completed a 20 min dive to a maximum depth of 22m.  
One of the pair became low on air and they started their ascent.  
At 15m the diver who was low on air lost control of his buoyancy 
and made a rapid ascent to the surface.  There was some panic at 
the surface.  This diver was given oxygen but was unhurt. 
September 2001 01/306 
A diver made a gradual descent to a maximum depth of 22m.  She 
then lost buoyancy control and became separated from her 
buddies.  She made a fast ascent to the surface.  Her total dive 
duration was 17 min.  No subsequent ill effects were reported. 
September 2001 01/309 
A trainee diver conducted a dive to 8m for 25 min, then 10m for 
22m, and finally to 18m for 12 min.  At 18m during the third dive 
he felt that he was unable to breathe.  He made a fast ascent to 
the surface, partly without his regulator.  No subsequent ill effects 
were reported. 
 
 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report -2001 
32  ©BS-AC - 2001 
Technique 
 
 
October 2000 01/036 
An instructor and two trainees entered the water to dive on an 
upturned wreck which was positioned in a harbour entrance.  They 
dived to seaward and approached the wreck underwater.  Their 
maximum depth was 17m.  They attempted to swim over the top of 
the upturned hull but encountered a strong current.  The instructor 
swam ahead and managed to cross the wreck.  He turned to check 
the trainees but could not see them.  They had failed to make 
headway in the current and were swept back and down to the 
seabed.  The instructor allowed himself to be carried back over the 
wreck and retraced his steps.  He could not find the others and he 
surfaced.  At the surface he raised the alarm with a nearby dive 
boat.  The two trainees made a normal ascent including a 1 min 
safety stop at 6m and they arrived at the surface 15m from the dive 
leader.  All were safely recovered into their boat and no subsequent 
ill effects were experienced. 
November 2000 01/047 
Two divers were 22 min into a dive to a maximum depth of 24m.  
During the ascent, at a depth of 12m, one of the pair lost control of 
his buoyancy and sank back down to 16m.  His buddy managed to 
gain control of the situation and brought him safely to the surface.  
No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
January 2001 01/081 
Three divers conducted a dive to 32m.  One of the trio lost his 
weightbelt during the dive but managed to retrieve and refit it.  
During the ascent, at 14m, the weightbelt slipped once more.  They 
got to 10m and then began to sink back down again.  They then 
made a faster than normal ascent to the surface.  No subsequent ill 
effects were experienced. 
February 2001 01/084 
Two divers were 10 min into a dive to a maximum depth of 21m.  At 
a depth of 20m the regulator of one of the pair began to free flow.  
They made a faster than normal ascent to the surface.  No 
subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
February 2001 01/085 
A pair of divers entered the water.  One of the pair had not dived for 
some time and the pair were advised by an accompanying 
instructor to limit their depth to 6m.  They dived to 21m.  At a depth 
of 20m, 8 min into the dive, the diver without recent experience felt 
nervous and was breathing heavily.  His regulator began to free 
flow.  He used his buddy's alternative air source and they made a 
safe ascent to the surface. 
February 2001 01/095 
A trainee was practicing the use of an alternative air source at a 
depth of 8m.  He was unable to breathe from the instructor's 
regulator and, after three attempts, the instructor released the 
trainee's weightbelt and brought him to the surface.  Both exhaled 
during the ascent and no subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
March 2001 01/115 
Three divers were conducting a dive to a depth of 36m.  At 35m 
one of the divers kicked the mouthpiece of one of the others and 
this regulator began to free flow.  This diver made a fast ascent to 
the surface missing 3 min of decompression stops.  One of the 
buddies made a normal ascent including decompression.  The third 
diver continued the dive alone and surfaced 20 min later.  No 
subsequent ill effects were reported. 
May 2001 01/154 
Two divers made a dive to 35m.  At this point one of the pair had 
100 bar in a 12l cylinder.  They started to ascend and this diver 
quickly got down to 50 bar.  At about 20m this diver ran out of air.  
His buddy passed him his alternative air source but he had difficulty 
breathing from it.  They made a direct ascent from 20m to the 
surface.  At the surface the alarm was raised but difficulty was 
experienced in keeping the diver who was out of air at the surface.  
He started to sink and to swallow water.  He was recovered into a 
boat but appeared to have stopped breathing.  An airway was 
established and he was given oxygen.  The divers had missed 
decompression stops.  The casualty was taken to hospital but was 
discharged later that day.  The diver was wearing a membrane 
drysuit and a 16kg weightbelt. 
May 2001 01/221 
A diver was diving with a borrowed 15l cylinder, his pony cylinder, a 
camera and a new drysuit with an autodump valve.  He dived to 
12m for 30 min.  At the end of the dive his buddy signaled that they 
should ascend.  This diver then found that he was too heavy to 
leave the bottom.  Air in his drysuit escaped through the dump valve 
and his BCD was full.  His buddy lifted him to the surface.  Their 
ascent was faster than normal.  No subsequent ill effects were 
reported. 
May 2001 01/153 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 21m.  15 min 
into the dive, at a depth of 20m, one of the pair experienced 
difficulty getting air from her regulator.  She took her buddy's 
alternative air source and they made an ascent to the surface.  At 
the surface the diver with air problems was very distressed.  It was 
subsequently found that the pillar valve had only been turned on a 
half to three quarters of a turn.  The diver had noticed that her 
contents gauge fluctuated when she breathed but had thought that 
this was because she had a new regulator.  No subsequent ill 
effects were experienced. 
May 2001 01/179 
A group of three divers completed a dive to a maximum depth of 
21m.  They planned to conduct some training drills at the end of the 
dive but one of the three ran out of air at 21m, 22 min into the dive.  
He made an ascent to the surface without air.  At the surface he 
appeared not to be breathing, but he responded quickly to oxygen 
treatment.  An ambulance was called but the casualty decided not 
to go to hospital. 
May 2001 01/200 
A pair of divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 29m.  
They planned to ascend the shotline when one of the pair reached 
50 bar.  However they were unable to find the shot and the diver 
with 50 bar became anxious about his air consumption.  The other 
diver deployed a delayed SMB.  The anxious diver was breathing 
excessively and his air got down to 10 bar.  They made an ascent 
using the alternative air source of the other diver.  The delay caused 
by the deployment of the SMB meant that they had to complete a 3 
min stop at 3m which they did.  No subsequent ill effects were 
experienced. 
June 2001 01/213 
Two trainees and an instructor were participating in a advanced 
diving course.  They planned to dive to 36m.  As they descended 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC -2001   33 
one of the trainees felt uncomfortable and returned to the surface.  
He dived again and at 10m again felt uncomfortable and returned to 
the surface.  His buddy stayed with him.  At the surface he was in a 
panic and others went to assist.  He later recovered and no ill 
effects were experienced.  His gauges were found to have been in 
imperial units and it is thought that this confused the diver. 
June 2001 01/235 
A pair of divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 35m.  
Towards the end of the dive one of the pair spotted a crab.  This 
diver had 70 bar air remaining and 1 min stop indicated.  He 
stopped to collect the crab.  At 18m his computer indicated a 10 
min decompression requirement.  They ascended to 4m and began 
their decompression stop.  After about 5 min the diver with the crab 
ran low on air and had to surface.  He was recovered into the boat 
and placed on oxygen.  His buddy surfaced 1 min later having 
completed all stops as indicated by his computer.  The diver who 
was low on air used up all of the oxygen.  He did not dive again that 
day and experienced no subsequent ill effects. 
July 2001 01/288 
A trainee was practicing mask clearing at a depth of 5m.  He had 
put his arm over his regulator hose and this was pulling the 
regulator from his mouth.  The instructor indicated the problem to 
the trainee and offered his auxillary regulator.  The trainee spat out 
his own regulator but did not take the alternative.  He attempted to 
rush to the surface.  He tried to inflate his BCD but did not suceed.  
The instructor brought him to the surface where a full recovery was 
made.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
September 2001 01/303 
A trainee diver started coughing at a depth of 18m.  She took her 
regulator from her mouth and would not replace it.  Her instructor 
eventually got her regulator back in and brought her safely to the 
surface.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
 
 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report -2001 
34  ©BS-AC - 2001 
Equipment 
 
 
October 2000 01/314 
Two divers were at a depth of 20m when the contents gauge of 
one of the divers became loose allowing air to escape.  Her 
cylinder quickly emptied.  Her buddy gave her his alternative air 
source and they made a safe ascent to the surface. 
February 2001 01/086 
Two divers were 9 min into a dive, at a depth of 35m.  The 
regulator of one of the pair began to free flow.  They made an 
ascent which was slightly faster than normal.  No subsequent ill 
effects were experienced. 
February 2001 01/093 
Two divers had dived to a maximum depth of 21m.  They 
ascended to a depth of 6m and had stopped on a ledge when the 
regulator of one of the pair began to free flow.  They made a faster 
than normal ascent.  No subsequent ill effects were reported. 
March 2001 01/219 
A diving club took delivery of a new compressor.  It was delivered 
with lubricants already in place and what was thought to be a 
spare filter.  The compressor was used for three months, during 
which it ran for 12 hours.  Divers used air from this compressor 
for pool and open water dives to a maximum depth of 20m.  It was 
then used on an expedition and divers noticed contamination.  
Examination revealed that there was no filter in the filter tower.  All 
the cylinders that had received air from this compressor were sent 
for cleaning. 
March 2001 01/099 
A diver had dived to a depth of 29m.  At 18m his regulator began 
to free flow.  He was brought to the surface by another diver.  No 
subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
March 2001 01/104 
A diver lost her weightbelt at 20m and started a rapid ascent.  She 
pulled her drysuit neck seal open and managed to regain control.  
No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
March 2001 01/106 
Two divers were at 18m when the BCD inflator of one of the pair 
stuck in the on position.  They made a slightly fast ascent to the 
surface.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
April 2001 01/158 
A pair of divers were 9 min into a dive at a depth of 28m.  The 
control on the side of the second stage of the regulator of one of 
the divers snapped off.  This regulator went into free flow and a 
rapid loss of air occurred.  He swam to his buddy and took his 
alternative air source.  They made a safe ascent to the surface.  
The regulator had been correctly serviced and it is thought that it 
had been damaged prior to the dive. 
 
 
April 2001 01/161 
Two divers entered the water from a boat and swam to the 
shotline.  They started their descent and during this one of the pair 
realised that he had not switched his light on.  Whilst trying to turn 
it on, he let go of the shotline and the current carried him away.  
His buddy followed.  They made an erratic descent to the seabed.  
They swam up current in an attempt to find the wreck.  During this 
swim the buddy became breathless and the other diver decided 
that they should abort the dive.  He deployed a delayed SMB.  He 
noticed that his buddy was unable to achieved positive buoyancy 
and was fumbling with his BCD direct feed.  He handed the buddy 
the SMB reel and inspected the direct feed.  He found that it was 
not connected properly and a covering sleeve made it difficult to 
connect.  After a while he succeeded and they began their ascent.  
The buddy was now hyperventilating and apparently on the verge 
of panic.  The buddy was finning hard and struggling with the reel.  
The other diver attempted to control the ascent rate.  At the 
surface they inflated their BCDs and awaited pick up.  The 
distressed diver left the water first but half way up the ladder he 
became exhausted and collapsed into the boat.  He quickly 
recovered and no subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
May 2001 01/171 
Two divers were at a depth of 32m.  One of the pair used an 
alternative air source to inflate a delayed SMB.  The regulator 
started to free flow and could not be stopped.  They made a 
controlled ascent to 3m where they conducted a safety stop until 
the air ran out.  At the surface the diver was badly shaken but 
recovered quickly once placed on oxygen. 
June 2001 01/206 
A pair of divers were at 28m when one of their regulators began to 
free flow.  He started a rapid ascent.  His buddy then took control 
and brought him to the surface using her alternative air source.  
The diver with the free flow was given oxygen as a precaution.  No 
subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
June 2001 01/222 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 23m.  One of 
the pair towed an SMB.  They started their ascent and at 15m the 
diver with the SMB experienced difficulties.  The direct feed hose 
had come off of her BCD and the corrugated hose to the BCD was 
leaking.  The BCD had risen up preventing her from using her 
drysuit inflation control.  Her buddy put air into her drysuit for her 
but it escaped through a cuff dump and an autodump valve.  The 
diver with the buoyancy problem used the SMB line to lift herself 
up, but this line then broke.  Her buddy then grabbed her and lifted 
her to the surface using a controlled buoyant lift.  Both their 
computers showed a fast ascent warning.  Total dive duration was 
40 min.  At the surface the buddy summoned the boat to assist. 
June 2001 01/214 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 10m.  They 
aborted the dive after 10 min because one of the pair was 
suffering from a tight neck seal.  No subsequent ill effects were 
reported. 
 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC - 2001   35 
Miscellaneous 
 
 
October 2000 01/313 
Three divers were conducting a dive in a lake in low visibility.  They 
were following a line laid on the bottom.  One of the divers became 
separated.  The other two looked for him briefly and then surfaced.  
The third diver continued alone, causing concern for the two at the 
surface.  All three safely completed the dive. 
January 2001 01/083 
Two divers completed a 26 min dive to a maximum depth of 21m. 
At the end of the dive, at a depth of 2m, one of the pair felt that he 
couldn't breathe and began to panic.  Assistance was summoned 
and the diver was recovered from the water.  He recovered and was 
advised to seek medical assistance. 
January 2001 01/082 
A diver completed a 30 min dive to a maximum depth of 36m.  She 
stopped a number of times during her ascent including 3 min at 4m 
and 1 min at 3m.  30 min after the dive she noticed a rash on her 
stomach.  She was given oxygen and medical advice was sought.  
It was concluded that this was not a skin bend.  After 5 min on 
oxygen the rash vanished.  She was kept on oxygen for a further 
hour.  No subsequent problems were experienced and no other 
treatment was given. 
February 2001 01/336 
Shore diver reported in difficulties with second diver close by.  Both 
divers reached shore without assistance.  (Coastguard report). 
 
May 2001 01/360 
Report from dive boat of two divers who missed shotline - possibly 
missing.  Helo tasked but divers surfaced safe and well nearby.  
(Coastguard report). 
May 2001 01/227 
A fully kitted diver was standing in a car park.  He lost his balance 
and landed in a sitting position on the bonnet and right wing of a 
parked car.  The car received minor damage. 
June 2001 01/488 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat.  False alarm.  (RNLI report). 
June 2001 01/398 
999 call reporting concern for husband and son who were shore 
diving.  Divers not surfaced for one hour.  Minutes later, divers 
observed swimming ashore safe and well.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2001 01/492 
Lifeboat launched to assist divers.  False alarm.  (RNLI report). 
June 2001 01/210 
A group of divers were descending.  One of the group was unable 
to keep up with the instructors and aborted his dive.  Maximum 
depth 20m, duration 6 min.  He returned to the surface and raised 
the alarm.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report -2001 
36  ©BS-AC - 2001 
Overseas Incidents 
 
 
Fatalities 
 
June 2001 01/186 
An instructor was teaching on a rebreather course.  He dived to a 
depth of 35m and is reported to have suffered an oxygen toxicity 
convulsion as he made his ascent.  He died as a result of this 
event. 
 
 
 
Decompression 
 
October 2000 01/077 
A diver on holiday conducted ten dives over a 5 day period.  None 
of these dives were deeper than 35m.  The tenth dive was one 
morning to a depth of 18m for 60 min with a 4 min stop at 6m.  
This dive was described as strenuous.  That afternoon she dived 
again, to 24m for 50 min with a 4 min stop at 6m.  4 hours later 
she began to feel unwell.  She sought medical advice and received 
three sessions of recompression treatment.  A few hours after her 
last session she caught a flight home.  On arriving in the UK she 
again developed symptoms of DCI and received a further session 
of recompression treatment.  She then traveled to her home and 
again experienced symptoms of DCI.  She attended a third 
recompression facility and received intensive treatment over a 
number of days.  She made a full recovery. 
November 2000 01/091 
A diver completed a week's diving holiday.  His penultimate dive 
was to 75m for 51 min with 10 min decompression.  His last dive, 
7 hours 31 min later, was to 28m for 43 min.  He flew home the 
following day, over 24 hours later.  During the flight he noticed a 
pain in his neck.  He had only 4 hours sleep and felt tired.  The 
following day he went to work and was engaged in lifting heavy 
objects.  That evening he experienced pain in his chest, neck and 
both arms.  He had 'pins and needles' and numbness in the back 
of both hands, a loss of appetite and nausea.  He sought medical 
advice and was referred for recompression treatment.  He made a 
complete recovery. 
February 2001 01/497 
A diver completed a diving course whilst on vacation over a five 
day period, typically diving two dives per day.  On day four they 
dived to 18m for 45 min in the morning and the same in the 
afternoon.  During the afternoon this diver ran out of air due to a 
faulty contents gauge.  The diver signaled the instructor and took 
the instructor's alternative air source.  At 8m the diver was 
instructed to make a free ascent to the surface, as this was part of 
the training course.  That evening the diver undertook a night dive.  
The diver experienced ear problems during the descent, tried to 
ascend a little and returned, unintended, to the surface alone.  The 
diver re-descended to join up with the buddy, became 
disorientated, began to panic and made several ascents and 
descents.  Eventually the buddy was located and the dive 
continued.  The following day the diver undertook two drift dives to 
a maximum depth of 18m.  After these dives the diver noted a pain 
in the shoulder but put this down to a strain.  No dives were made 
the following day and the day after the diver flew home.  As the 
airplane descended this diver got 'pins and needles' in the legs 
and the legs went numb.  The diver went to bed that night and 
awoke the following day with aches and pains and no sense of 
balance.  Medical advice was sought and the diver was 
recompressed for 7 hours.  4 weeks later this person still tired 
easily.  This person has given up diving. 
March 2001 01/109 
An instructor was leading a dive with two trainees on a deep diving 
course.  8 min into the dive, at a depth of 30m, he experienced 
severe narcosis and decided to abort the dive.  They ascended 
slowly to 5m where they completed a 3 min stop.  10 min later, in 
the boat, the diver experienced pain in his chest, fatigue, loss of 
mental faculties, pain in his right elbow and an itching on his upper 
right arm.  5 min later a skin rash developed.  He was placed on 
oxygen and taken to a recompression facility.  He was 
recompressed for 2 hours and the symptoms resolved. 
April 2001 01/128 
A diver conducted a series of two dives per day over a period of 
four days.  On leaving the water at the end of the last dive he had 
to strain to get up the ladder onto the boat.  Once on the boat he 
noticed that his legs felt abnormal; they moved involuntarily, he felt 
a ëbubbling sensationí, and was unable to move them properly.    
He was placed on oxygen and taken to a recompression facility.  
He received five sessions of treatment over a nine day period.  He 
made a good recovery.  It was considered that a back injury, 
received several months earlier, had left him susceptible to a DCI. 
May 2001 01/265 
A diver dived to 23m for a total of 50 min, including a 3 min safety 
stop at 6m.  12 hours later he dived again.  This time to 26m for 
44 min with a 3 min safety stop at 6m.  After this dive he 
experienced a headache on the left-hand side of his head.  After a 
few minutes the pain went and was replaced by a pain in the back 
of his left shoulder.  He decided not to make a third dive.  His 
elbow also developed an ache.  He had had a previous DCI and 
stated that he might have a recurrence.  He was placed on oxygen 
and taken to a recompression facility.  He was examined, advised 
to re-hydrate himself and then to return the following morning.  
The following morning the pain was still present and his forearm 
felt numb.  He received five sessions of recompression treatment, 
after which the symptoms did not ease any further.  He was 
unable to fly home for 12 days and undertook examination for a 
PFO.  A probable PFO was diagnosed and further tests were 
being planned. 
May 2001 01/162 
A diver conducted a series of dives over a period of six days.  On 
the final day he dived to a maximum depth of 26m for a total of 56 
min.  3 hours 21 min later he dived again.  This dive was to a 
maximum depth of 12m.  Knowing that he was flying home the 
following day he planned to surface very slowly, spending time at 
6m.  Back at the boat he ascended to a weighted shotline that had 
been suspended from the boat.  He hung onto this line for 6 min.  
The surface condition was rough and the diver was pulled up and 
down by the movement of the boat.  Back on the boat he 
developed a severe headache.  35 hours later he flew home.  
During the flight he developed a pain in his elbow.  By the time that 
he landed he also had a pain in his leg.  His headache remained 
and he experienced some balance problems.  The following day 
the symptoms remained and he sought medical advice.  He was 
referred to a recompression facility and received four treatments 
over a period of five days.  This resolved his symptoms. 
July 2001 01/272 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC - 2001   37 
A pair of divers completed a dive to 37m.  They conducted stops 
at 6m as indicated by their computers.  They completed a further 1 
min safety stop before surfacing.  The dive duration was 38 min 
and they completed 12 min of decompression stops.  The water 
temperature at depth was -1 deg C and 10 deg C at depths less 
than 10m.  30 min after the dive, one of the pair noticed a red rash 
and swelling above his right wrist.  He then developed a swelling 
below his right elbow.  He felt unwell.  He was placed on oxygen, 
given fluids and taken to a recompression facility.  They arrived at 
the recompression facility 25 min later and the diver felt a lot 
better.  He was recompressed but this did not affect his 
symptoms.  All symptoms were resolved 48 hours later.  His 
buddy experienced no ill effects. 
 
 
 
Injury/Illness 
 
November 2000 01/041 
An instructor was leading a 'try' dive.  At a depth of 4m the trainee 
experienced problems with his buoyancy control.  The instructor 
turned to help and in doing so he swept his left hand down.  His 
hand touched a fan worm shell cast which was on an anchor lying 
on the seabed.  The shell cut the base of three of his fingers.  
After the dive he sought medical advice and nine stitches were 
required to close the wounds. 
March 2001 01/112 
A group of six divers entered the water from a boat.  One of the 
group went under the boat and came into contact with the 
propeller of one of the engines.  The propeller was still turning and 
the diver received injuries to his arm and shoulder, his diving 
equipment was also damaged.  The group left the water and 
assistance was sought by radio.  The diver was taken ashore and 
then to hospital.  He was treated for a broken collar bone, severe 
bruising of his right arm and cuts to his arm, shoulder and head. 
April 2001 01/194 
Six divers were moving diving equipment on a jetty when three 
large waves struck the jetty in quick succession.  The equipment 
was washed into the water but the divers managed to hold onto the 
jetty.  One diver injured his knee and another injured his fingers.  
When subsequently recovering the equipment from the water 
another diver was washed onto rocks which were covered in 
oyster shells and his shin was cut.  He was taken to hospital 
where the wound was stitched. 
May 2001 01/262 
A diver conducted a series of, typically, two dives per day over a 
two week period with a one day break in the middle.  Maximum 
depth was 30m.  His last dive was to 30m for 58 min with a 3 min 
precautionary stop at 6m.  His computer never indicated a 
decompression requirement during this dive.  53 hours later he 
made an 8 hour flight.  After 7 hours on the ground another 4 hour 
30 min flight was made.  The following day he suffered severe 
'pins and needles' in both hands.  He was referred to hospital and 
placed on oxygen.  He was released the following day with 
medication for a trapped nerve.  The next day the symptoms 
persisted and the diver was treated in a recompression chamber.  
His symptoms reduced.  The symptoms reappeared the following 
day and he was recompressed again.  The final diagnosis was a 
trapped nerve in his neck. 
May 2001 01/187 
A pair of divers entered the water.  Immediately one got into 
difficulties and became unresponsive.  The boat skipper called 
them back to the boat.  One diver got out of the water and the 
skipper manhandled the unresponsive diver back into the boat.  
Other divers then started to surface from their dives and assisted 
with the casualty.  She was given oxygen.  She had had little to eat 
that day.  Once ashore she was taken by ambulance to hospital 
from where she was subsequently discharged. 
September 2001 01/295 
A diver undertook a dive to 35m.  He made a normal gentle 
descent on a shotline.  He equalised his ears normally during the 
descent.  At 35m he felt air rush out from his left ear.  The dive 
was aborted and the diver sought medical attention.  A perforation 
of the left ear was diagnosed.  The diver had not been suffering 
from congestion.  He had had wisdom teeth removed 6 weeks 
previously. 
 
 
 
Boating / Surface Incidents 
 
January 2001 01/080 
A dive boat arrived at a dive site and the divers prepared to enter 
the water.  At this point the engines cut out and could not be 
restarted.  The fuel gauges showed empty.  The cox stated that 
they did not read correctly but examination of the priming pumps 
and the fuel filters showed that there was no fuel.  One of the 
divers repaired the broken VHF radio and they summoned 
assistance.  Another boat assisted and they were safely towed 
ashore. 
February 2001 01/089 
Three divers entered the water at a remote island dive site.  They 
dived in heavy sea conditions to a depth of 25m and surfaced after 
20 min.  They surfaced 100m away from their boat but were not 
seen and were not able to attract attention with their whistles.  One 
boat stayed at the dive site and radioed for assistance.  Another 
boat searched for them down current.  The divers were found after 
1 hour 50 min at the surface, 1.4 miles from their entry point.  One 
of the group was suffering from the cold.  Water temperature was 
24 deg C.  The journey back to the shore took 2 hours.  The diver 
who had suffered from the cold was treated for mild hypothermia. 
August 2001 01/276 
A dive boat was being launched through surf from a beach.  A 
wave hit the boat and turned it over.  All of the occupants were 
thrown out.  One suffered two broken ribs and a punctured lung.  
A lot of equipment was lost.  The local Coastguard called the 
police and an ambulance.  The occupants swam ashore.  The 
casualty was transferred to hospital and released later that day. 
August 2001 01/289 
An RHIB was underway to a dive site when rough seas were 
encountered.  The divers decided upon an alternative, more 
sheltered, site.  Whilst traveling to this site water started to enter 
the boat.  They discovered that the joint between the starboard 
tube and the hull had failed.  They commenced bailing and 
contacted the emergency services by radio.  They began a slow 
return to the shore.  The engine then started to cut out, although 
they were able to restart it each time.  Two marine police boats 
came to their assistance.  Equipment and personnel were 
transferred into the police boats.  The engine then cut out and 
would not restart.  They were taken under tow.  A short distance 
from the harbour a major separation of the tubes from the hull took 
place.  The boat, crew and equipment were all safely recovered to 
the shore. 
 
 
 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report -2001 
38  ©BS-AC - 2001 
Ascents 
 
February 2001 01/108 
Two divers completed a 20 min dive to a maximum depth of 16m.  
They deployed a delayed SMB to make their ascent.  One of the 
divers then lost his weightbelt and made a rapid ascent from 14m 
to the surface.  At the surface he was found to be tangled in line 
from the SMB reel.  His buddy tried to stop the fast ascent, but 
stopped to make a precautionary 1 min stop at 6m before 
surfacing.  The buoyant diver was recovered into the boat and 
placed on oxygen.  This diver experienced no symptoms.  He was 
given a medical examination and no problems were found. 
April 2001 01/163 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 14m.  11 min 
into the dive, at a depth of 11m, one of the pair experienced a 
problem with his ear.  He signaled to the dive leader who stopped.  
The diver with the ear problem moved into a vertical position and 
then lost control of his buoyancy.  He made a rapid ascent to the 
surface.  The dive leader attempted to slow the ascent using a 
buddy line that was attached between them.  At the surface the 
dive leader put air into the other diver's BCD and summoned the 
dive boat.  The diver was recovered into the boat and placed on 
oxygen.  Both divers were medically examined.  No subsequent 
problems were experienced. 
 
 
 
Technique 
 
October 2000 01/051 
A group of divers undertook a dive to a maximum depth of 45m.  
At the end of the dive one diver assisted the cox, who was also 
diving, to attach a lifting bag to the boat's anchor and sent it to the 
surface.  They ascended with the anchor line and hung under the 
boat with all of the other divers who were decompressing.  The 
diver who had assisted the cox used a crab hook to hold onto the 
line.  Another diver used his BCD to rise to the surface but he held 
onto the line and dragged the others towards the surface.  The 
diver with the crab hook struggled to release it and when he did he 
sank back down to 11m.  He re-ascended to 6m and noticed the 
cox hanging at 6m on another line at the stern of the boat.  The 
cox signaled for the diver to join him.  He swam over and when he 
arrived the cox grabbed his alternative air source.  He then 
realised that the cox was out of air and passed him his regulator.  
The cox's computer indicated that he needed 9 min of 
decompression.  When this was completed the rescuing diver 
required a further 7 min decompression.  He indicated that the cox 
should wait with him but he chose to make a free ascent to the 
surface.  The rescuing diver completed his stops and made a safe 
ascent.  All divers were safely recovered. 
November 2000 01/054 
A diver entered the water as part of a lead dive group.  The plan 
was to descend a reef to a depth of 40m and then to ascend to be 
picked up by a following inflatable boat.  The diver was buddied 
with the group leader.  They descended to 40m.  The guide then 
signaled that they should descend further to 50m.  After 3 min at 
50m the diver's computer showed that decompression was 
required and he started to ascend.  His buddy, the dive guide, 
swam deeper.  The diver signaled for him to ascend and stay 
close to him, but he did not comply.  At 20m the diver showed the 
buddy his contents gauge and computer and indicated that he will 
need assistance.  Again the guide swam away.  The diver 
ascended to 9m and his computer indicated 17 min 
decompression, and his air supply was low.  The guide returned 
and the diver then ran out of air.  He took the guide's alternative air 
source, but after 3 breaths this also ran out and they were forced 
to surface.  At the surface they had to wait 10 min, with others 
from their party, before they were picked up.  Back on the main 
boat they discovered that other divers had also missed 
decompression stops.  The divers insisted that the boat should 
return to the shore.  Once ashore the diver sought medical advice 
and was given precautionary recompression treatment. 
 
 
 
Equipment 
 
October 2000 01/042 
Two divers made a descent to a wreck in a depth of 20m.  During 
the descent one of the pair attempted to put air into his BCD but it 
did not inflate and escaping air could be heard.  He settled on the 
seabed and removed his BCD.  He discovered a hole in the 
corrugated hose, close to the top.  The dive was aborted and the 
pair made their way back to the surface.  At the surface he had to 
be supported by his buddy whilst awaiting pick up by their boat.  
No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
May 2001 01/188 
A pair of divers made a descent to 45m.  At this depth the one of 
the divers' regulators started to free flow.  He took his buddy's 
alternative air source.  Because he was unfamiliar with it and 
because it was on a short hose he breathed some water.  The 
buddy gave him his main regulator and used the alternative air 
source himself.  They made an ascent to the surface, including a 
1 min stop at 6m.  During the ascent they got an ascent rate 
warning from one of their computers.  It was thought possible that 
air escaping from the free flowing regulator was becoming trapped 
in one of the divers' T-shirt; the regulator was moved clear.  No 
subsequent ill effects were reported.  It was subsequently found 
that a failure of the regulator first stage had occurred. 
 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC - 2001   39 
INCIDENT REPORTS 
 
If you would like to add to, correct or place a different interpretation upon any of the incidents in this report please put 
your comments in writing and send them to the following address: 
     The Incidents Advisor,  
     The British Sub-Aqua Club,  
     Telford's Quay,  
     South Pier Road, 
Ellesmere Port,  
     Cheshire,  
     CH65 4FL. 
 
For new incidents please complete a BSAC incident report form and send it to BSAC HQ at the address shown above.   
 
All  personal details are treated as confidential.  
 
Incident Report Forms can be obtained free of charge by phoning BSAC HQ on 0151  350 6200 
or from the BSAC Internet website.
 
 
Numerical & Statistical Analyses 
 
Statistical Summary of Incidents 
 
 
 
1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 
Incidents Reported 199 123 263 385 351 315 397 452 397 439 465 
Incidents Analysed 199 123 263 385 351 315 370 431 382 417 458 
UK Incidents 170 98 236 322 318 295 349 404 357 384 433 
Overseas Incidents 24 14 21 9 33 20 21 27 25 33 25 
Unknown Locations 5 11 6 54 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 
BSAC Members 111 110 146 164 157 136 101 135 128 113 122 
Non-BSAC Members 18 13 19 8 20 4 29 52 47 52 94 
Membership Unknown 70 0 98 213 178 175 219 217 182 219 217 
 
 
 
Incident  Report Source Analysis 
 
Total Reports: 598
Total Incidents: 458
Other
Newspaper
RNLI
Coastguard
Incident Reports
 
 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report -2001 
40  ©BS-AC - 2001 
 
 
History of UK Diving Fatalities 
 
  Number of Fatalities 
 
Year 
 
Membership BSAC Non-BSAC 
1965 6,813 3 - 
1966 7,979 1 4 
1967 8,350 1 6 
1968 9,241 2 1 
1969 11,299 2 8 
1970 13,721 4 4 
1971 14,898 0 4 
1972 17,041 10 31 
1973 19,332 9 20 
1974 22,150 3 11 
1975 23,204 2 - 
1976 25,310 4 - 
1977 25,342 3 - 
1978 27,510 8 4 
1979 30,579 5 8 
1980 24,900 6 7 
1981 27,834 5 7 
1982 29,590 6 3 
1983 32,177 7 2 
1984 32,950 8 5 
1985 34,861 8 6 
1986 34,210 6 9 
1987 34,500 6 2 
1988 32,960 10 6 
1989 34,422 4 8 
1990 36,434 3 6 
1991 43,475 8 9 
1992 45,626 9 8 
1993 50,722 3 6 
1994 50,505 6 6 
1995 52,364 9 9 
1996 48,920 7 9 
1997 48,412 4 12 
1998 46,712 6 16 
1999 46,682 8 9 
2000 41,692 6 11 
2001 41,272 9 13 
 
 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2001                                  
„BSAC - 2001   41 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE INCIDENT REPORT 
 
AV  Artificial ventilation 
BCD  Buoyancy compensation device (e.g. stab jacket) 
CAGE  Cerebral arterial gas embolism 
CG  Coastguard 
CPR  Cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
DCI  Decompression illness 
DDRC  Diving Diseases Research Centre (Plymouth, UK) 
ECG  Electrocardiogram 
GPS  Global Positioning System 
Helo  Helicopter 
HMCG  Her Majestyís Coastguard 
ILB  Inshore lifeboat 
IV  Intravenous 
LB  Lifeboat 
m   Metre 
min  Minute(s) 
MRSC  Marine Rescue Sub Centre 
PFO  Patent foramen ovale 
POB  Persons on board 
RAF  Royal Air Force 
RHIB  Rigid hull inflatable boat 
ROV  Remotely operated vehicle 
RNLI  Royal National Lifeboat Institution 
SAR  Search and rescue 
SMB  Surface marker buoy 
999  UK Emergency phone number 
 
 

