Published by The British Sub-Aqua Club in the interests of diving safety
The British Sub-Aqua Club
NDC Diving Incidents Report
1998
Compiled by
Brian Cumming
Diving Safety and Incidents Advisor

The British Sub-Aqua Club  
NDC Diving Incidents Report  
1998 
Compiled by Brian Cumming 
Diving Incidents Advisor 
 
Introduction 
 
This section contains the 1998 Diving Incidents Report, produced by The British Sub-Aqua Club 
(BSAC) in the interest of promoting diving safety. It is important to note that it contains details of UK 
diving incidents occurring to divers of all affiliations, plus incidents occurring world-wide involving 
BSAC members. 
Report Format 
The majority of statistical information contained within this report is also shown in graphical form. Please note 
that all statistical information is generally produced from UK data only and does not include Overseas 
Incidents unless noted as ‘All Incidents’. 
 
The contents of this report are split into an overview of the year, details of nine incident categories plus some 
historical analyses. The various sections can be found as shown below; 
 
Within each category the incidents are listed in the order of their occurrence, not necessarily that of Incident 
Reference. They are laid out in the following form: 
 
MONTH/YR OF INCIDENT            INCIDENT REF.  
Brief Narrative of Incident.................................... 
.............................................................................. 
 
The nature of many diving incidents is such that there is usually more than one cause or effect. Where this 
has happened the incident has been classified under the more appropriate cause or effect. For instance an 
incident involving a fast ascent, causing decompression illness will be classified under 'Decompression 
Incidents'. 
Brian Cumming, 
BSAC Diving Incidents Advisor, 
November 1998, Updated January 199 
Acknowledgements 
The nature of this report requires that data is collected from several different sources. I would like to extend 
my thanks and appreciation to the following for their assistance in its production and in ensuring its 
completeness: 
z The British Hyperbaric Association  
z The Institute of Naval Medicine  
i) Overview
ii) Fatalities
iii) Decompression Incidents
iv) Injury / illness
v) Boating & Surface Incidents
vi) Ascent Problems
vii) Technique Problems
viii) Equipment Problems
ix) Miscellaneous Incidents
x) Overseas Incidents
xi) Numerical & Statistical Analyses

z Phil Wren, Coastguard Sport Diving Liaison Officer  
z Peter Bradley, The Sea Safety Liaison Officer, Royal National Lifeboat Institute  
and, in particular, all of those divers and other sources who have taken the trouble to complete Incident 
Reports and share their learning experience with others.  
Incident Reports 
If you would like to add to, correct or place a different interpretation upon any of the incidents in this report 
please put your comments in writing and e-mail them to safety@bsac.com or post to the following address:  
The Incidents Advisor, 
The British Sub-Aqua Club, 
Telford's Quay, 
Ellesmere Port,  
South Wirral,  
Cheshire, CH65 4FL. 
 
For new incidents, the minimum information required consists of: Date Of Incident, Location Of Incident 
and the Nature of the Incident.  
All of this information can be notified initially to BSAC HQ by Email to divesafe@bsac.com. A more detailed 
report can be set out on an Incident Report Form, sent on request or on receipt of a Preliminary Incident 
Report Card. All reports should be to BSAC HQ at the address shown above. 
All personal details are treated as confidential.  
 
Incident Report Forms  
These can be obtained free of charge by phoning BSAC HQ on 0151 350 6200 
 
 

NDC Diving Incidents Report 1998 
Overview 
1998 has seen a continuation of the rise in the total number of incidents that have been reported. In the 1998 
incident year (October 97 to September 98 inclusive) we have recorded 431 incidents, compared with 370 in 
the previous year. At least part of this increase will be due to the improved data capture that has been put in 
place. As the following chart shows 67% of these incidents have occurred in the summer period; this is 
entirely consistent with previous years. The only abnormality is the reduction in June and this coincides with a 
period of poor weather that probably resulted in a reduction in the amount of dives that took place.  
 
 
This year marked the introduction of the new incident 
report form and a new database structure. These two 
changes have allowed for more accurate data analysis 
and some of this new data in shown in this report, for 
example the information on depths at which incidents 
started, which can be found later. 
 
Fatalities 
The report includes 22 UK fatalities of which 6 involved 
BSAC members. These numbers reflect the trend 
highlighted last year, namely that the ratio of non BSAC 
to BSAC fatalities has increased.  
Last year 75% of the fatalities involved non BSAC 
members this year it is 73%. Over the last 20 years the 
number of non BSAC to BSAC fatalities has been almost 
equal. In the last two years this has risen rapidly to a 
ratio of 3 to 1. Unless we accept the extremely implausible hypothesis that only 25% of UK diving is 
conducted by BSAC members then the logical conclusion is that, based on these data, there is significantly 
increased risk associated with diving outside of a ‘club’ environment. This conclusion is supported by an 
analysis of the details of the fatalities where a number can be seen to be due to the inexperience of those 
involved and where it is probable that in a ‘club’ situation more experienced companions might have 
prevented a tragedy. 
 
The causal factors behind the UK fatalities can be summarised as follows:- 
 
Five of the fatalities (23%) involved people who were diving alone, having entered the water alone or 
deliberately separating and continuing their dives once underwater. In two of these cases divers apparently 
re-entered the water, alone (one to recover a mask the other a stuck anchor), and with only 50 bar remaining 
in their diving cylinders. One of these may also have had his drysuit direct feed disconnected (Note - this 
comment updated from initial publication due to new information received). 
 
Divers’ inexperience was clearly implicated in four of the fatalities, people had placed themselves in situations 
for which they were not prepared. In all cases the dives in question were well within the normal spectrum of 
UK diving, but probably beyond the skills of the individuals in these cases. 
 
Once again depth was implicated in fatalities. This year three divers died whilst conducting dives to depths 
greater than 50m. One was to 57m, one to 75m and the third was to 85m. The last two were using trimix.  
It is worth noting that only six incidents were recorded this year involving dives to greater than 50m, and 50%
of these resulted in fatalities. The serious nature of deep dives has long been understood, this high fatality 
ratio simple reinforces the point.  
 
Rebreathers are new to the statistics this year and the fatalities associated with them have received wide 
coverage. This incident report records three fatalities of rebreather users in the UK, and it is pertinent to note 
that a fourth fatality occurred in the Republic of Ireland. This fourth case is not to be found in this report since 
it was outside of the UK and did not involve a BSAC member. Additionally, another UK rebreather user 
became suddenly unconscious whilst underwater and was only saved by the quick action of others. 
All of these cases involved the same make of rebreather and much of this issue is currently subject to legal 
proceedings. Until the facts emerge divers are advised to treat this technology with great caution.  
 
Two fatalities involved other activities that are contrary to recommended practice namely re-entry 
recompression and a high trainee to instructor ratio.
Monthly Breakdown of All Incidents - 1998 
 

 
Three cases involved individuals who suffered major heart attacks whilst underwater. In all three cases the 
indications are that the individuals were unaware of potential problems and they were at risk of an attack 
whether they dived or not. 
 
In several cases more than one of the above factors applies.  
 
Lastly, in seven cases there is simply not enough information to make a conclusion on the causes of the 
death. It may well be that a number of the above factors were involved but we will probably never have the 
information to decided. 
 
I will summarise this section with one simple conclusion. Of the fifteen cases, for which it is possible to make 
an assessment of the causal factors, only three were probably unavoidable from a dive practice perspective. 
Those three concern the individuals who had heart attacks. In the other twelve cases it would appear that one 
or more of the elements of safe diving practice were not being observed.  
 
 
Incident depths 
The new report form and database format captures both the maximum depth of the dive and the depth at 
which the incident starts. The following chart indicates the maximum depth of the dive for which an incident 
has been reported. The pattern of these dives is similar to that reported last year with the predominance of 
incidents in the 11 to 40 metre range. It is believed that this reflects the amount of diving that takes place in 
these depths and the BSAC has initiated research to provide more information on this subject. 
 
 
  
The next chart shows the depth at which the incident 
started. Inevitably the data is biased towards the 
shallower depths since many incidents happen during the 
ascent or at the surface. Critical among these are the DCI 
cases where almost always the casualty is out of the 
water before any problems are noted. This partially 
explains the large occurrence of ‘surface’ cases as this 
includes divers with DCI who have left the water. 
 
  
 
Other surface incidents involve boats and boating 
incidents. This year saw 62 cases of dive boats with 
engine problems and another 14 cases of problems with 
the boat itself. In previous years I have commented on 
(and so have the Coastguard) the importance of divers 
carrying good surface location aids, so that if they are lost 
at the surface they can increase their chances of being 
spotted quickly. 
If divers are underwater when the engine fails then lost 
divers are often the result since it becomes difficult for the 
boat to track their progress. It may be relevant to report 
that although there has been an increase in the number 
of reported cases of engine failure, the number of reports 
of lost divers has gone down. Could it be that divers are 
taking more care with surface detection aids and enabling 
their boat cover to find them rather than seeking 
assistance from the rescue services? 
In at least one case a strobe light was used by divers to attract attention to themselves, just as it was getting 
dark. Without this light the result may well have been very different.  
Whilst on the subject of divers lost at the surface, it is worth noting three cases where divers have been left in 
the water by diving trip boat operators. In all cases the divers were ‘lone pairs’ in a mixed diving party, 
involved in a day’s diving trip, unknown to others in the party. In all cases their absence was not noted by the 
boat operators and they left the site assuming that they had recovered all of their customers. You will find one 
Maximum Depth of Dive Involving an Incident 
Depth at which Incident Started 
 

such case in this report, but I am aware of two other instances (these are not reported in the body of the 
report because they to not meet the criteria of UK or BSAC member).  
In the case in this report the divers were picked up by a lifeboat.  
In one of the other cases the divers were spotted by others on the boat and the boat returned for them.  
The third case is from Australia. Here the divers were only missed two days later. They had been diving some 
forty miles off shore and they were never found.  
Divers’ use of ‘trip boat’ dives of this nature is on the increase; just be sure when you enter the water that 
there is someone on the boat who is aware of your presence and will account for your return.  
 
Diver Qualifications 
The next two charts show the qualification of those BSAC members who were involved in reported incidents. 
 
 
It is important to note that these divers were involved in the incident but this does not necessarily mean that 
they suffered the effects of it. Some were involved as rescuers or in some other indirect way. 
 
An analysis of incident by diver qualification shows that no grade of diver, from novice to instructor is immune 
to problems. It is all too easy to make the assumption that only inexperienced divers get into problems, but the 
chart shows that this is not so. 
Although it suggests that divers at the level of Sports Diver are the most prone to problems one must be 
careful in the interpretation of these data. The picture is clearly distorted by the numbers of members that we 
have at each of these grades. It is very probable that the largest single group of members are Sports Divers, 
hence the high incidence of problems.  
 
What is clear from this information is that about half of the incidents (69 out of 146: a little down on last year) 
where the diver’s BSAC qualification is known involve divers with more than average experience. Given that 
this group is probably less than half of our membership it means that you are more likely to experience 
problems as your experience increases! One explanation for this, as you will read in the text of this report, is 
that as divers gain in experience so they push the limits of their diving, and this can lead them into difficulties.
 
Divers’ use of the Emergency Services 
Divers’ use of the rescue services shows a monthly distribution aligned to the distribution of all incidents, and 
is clearly correlated with the number of dives that are taking place. Our demands upon the Coastguard 
service was typical for the year, as were our calls upon the services of the RNLI.  
 
Qualification of the Divers Involved in Incidents
 
Qualification of Instructors Involved in Incidents
 

 
 
 
 
Decompression Incidents 
The BSAC database contains 104 reports of DCI incidents, some of which involve more than one casualty. 
When these multiple cases are counted the result is 120 incidents of DCI. 
43% of these incidents involve diving to depths greater than 30m, 31% involve rapid ascents, 20% involve 
missed decompression stops, and 15% are associated with repeat diving. Some cases involve more than one 
of these causes. 
16% are reported to have been within the limits of tables or computers. 
 
The BSAC and the British Hyperbaric Association / Institute of Naval Medicine share data on an annual basis 
to seek a more complete picture of the numbers of DCI cases that have occurred. The BHA / INM database 
contains 131 cases of DCI in this period, 14 cases of omitted decompression and 46 cases where DCI was 
suspected and subsequently proved to be otherwise.  
Confidentiality issues prevent a full reconciliation of the BSAC and the INM / BHA data, but the best estimate 
that I can make of the total number of UK DCI cases is 190. 
 
In their review of the data, the INM highlight an increasing trend in ‘omitted decompression’, and they 
postulate a link with the numbers of people undertaking ‘extended range diving’ and the use of large capacity 
twin sets. 
 
 
In Conclusion 
Please read the detailed reports in this booklet carefully and use them to learn from others’ mistakes. It is a lot 
less painful than making the same mistake yourself.  
 
Finally, if you must have an incident please report it on our new Incident Report form, available free from 
BSAC HQ. Your experience can help others to avoid the same problem, and your anonymity is assured – 
great care is taken to preserve the confidentiality of any personal information disclosed in BSAC Incident Reports
 
UK Incidents involving The Coastguard Agency - 
Monthly Breakdown 
 
Diver’s Use of RNLI Facilities by Month 
 
 
Also very similar to last year is divers’ need for 
assistance by helicopter. There were two main reasons 
for this; firstly transport of divers with DCI to 
recompression facilities and, secondly, for the location of 
lost divers. 
Diver’s Use of SAR Helicopters by Month 
 

NDC Diving Incidents Report 1998 
Fatalities 
October 1997 98/008 
Two divers started a dive to 18m. At a depth of 7m the mask of one of them started to flood. After 15 mins 
they surfaced to clear the mask, which had been fitted over the diver's hood. They re-descended. At 18m the 
diver who had had the mask problem indicated that he was out of air. They started to ascend and the diver 
without air went up quickly. His buddy lost sight of him in the bubbles and sunlight. As the buddy ascended he 
saw a diver descending feet first but did not realise that this was his partner. At the surface he raised the 
alarm. The lost diver was recovered 15 mins later, unconscious, from 20m, by a search team. He was taken 
to hospital but failed to recover. It is believed that both divers had only five dives experience, and this was 
their first in UK conditions. 
 
October 1997 98/015 
Two divers dived to a depth of 35m. One diver had only five previous dives. He panicked and became 
unconscious underwater. His buddy brought him to the surface. Resuscitation attempts were unsuccessful. 
(Newspaper report only) 
 
UK Fatalities - Monthly Breakdown From October 1997 to September 1998 incl. 
 
 
 
November 1997 98/025 
Three divers entered the water having planned that two would dive to 40m and that the third would continue to 
57m, on his own, to explore some caves. The dive continued as planned and the third diver continued down 
alone from 40m. The pair was engaged in taking photos when one of them saw the third diver slightly above 
him, 10m away, in distress, 'rolling and kicking'. The pair went to help and as they approached the distressed 
diver's regulator fell from his mouth. They tried to replace it but it was rejected. When purged no air flowed so 
they tried the distressed diver's second regulator, this was rejected and flowed only a small amount of air 
when purged. One of the pair offered their own pony cylinder, but by this time the distressed diver had 
become unconscious. The casualty was lifted to the surface using the buoyancy of one of the other divers, 
since the casualty's own direct feeds would not provide air. At the surface, other divers assisted to tow the 
casualty to the shore. Resuscitation was administered to the casualty until an ambulance arrived about 15 
mins later. The diving pair had missed stops. They were given oxygen and flown to a recompression facility 
for treatment, although neither showed any symptoms. The casualty failed to recover. The casualty was using 
two 10l cylinders which had shown 210 bar and 80 bar during pre dive checks. 
 
November 1997 98/063 
A diver was reported missing from a dive from a local charter boat. Three divers had undertaken a fairly 
shallow dive but one had experienced problems and surfaced with the more experienced one. The remaining 
diver did not surface and a search underwater proved unsuccessful. A lifeboat, ferry, Coastguard teams and 
many surface units failed to find the diver. 
 
January 1998 98/064 
Two divers commenced a dive in a quarry to a depth of 27m. They conducted a thorough buddy check and 
another check at 5m. At 27m the regulator of one of the divers started to free flow. This diver was given his 
buddy's pony regulator and the buddy turned off the cylinder of the free flowing regulator to stop the confusion 
of bubbles. The diver giving air took charge of the ascent and neither took action to dump air from the sharing 
diver's BC. In the later stages of the ascent this diver became very buoyant and 'shot' to the surface. The 

pony regulator was pulled from his mouth and he may have temporarily lost consciousness. Both divers 
arrived at the surface and decided to re-descend to make a slower ascent. The cylinder of the free flowing 
regulator was turned on but it continued to free flow so the second descent was made with the other diver's 
pony regulator. It is thought that their re-descent took them to 35m, and they decided to make an ascent up 
the slope of the quarry. After ascending only 5m the pony cylinder ran out of air. The sharing diver signalled 
this to his buddy. He remembers taking in water and then 'a strange pleasant sensation and everything going 
dark'. His next memory is being back at the surface. He believes that his buddy opened the cylinder on his 
BCD thus causing him to ascend. He also expressed concern that he may have kicked his buddy. He was 
flown to a recompression facility but was not recompressed. The buddy diver failed to return to the surface. 
The lost diver's body was recovered the following day by police divers from a depth of 35m. The coroner 
reported death by drowning. It is reported that this diver mask was in place but that his main cylinder was 
turned off (the latter from press reports). The water temperature was reported to be 8 deg C. 
 
May 1998 98/160 
A diver failed to surface after a Trimix rebreather dive to 75m. He started to dive with two others who were 
using open circuit equipment, but they separated during the descent. The two other divers surfaced without 
incident. Sub surface and surface searches were unsuccessful and a team of technical divers were called in. 
On the second day of searching they located and raised the diver.  
 
May 1998 98/162 
An instructor and four trainees were descending a shotline to a wreck in 30m of water. One of the trainees got 
into difficulties and he was taken to the surface by the instructor. One of the remaining three then became 
tangled in a distance line and, shortly afterwards ran out of air. Another diver gave him his octopus regulator 
but at some point the mouthpiece came away from the second stage. They then started to share a regulator. 
This was not successful and one or both started to panic. The instructor returned and recovered the diver who 
had run out of air, unconscious, from the seabed. He brought the casualty to the surface. Resuscitation 
attempts were made. All five were flown by helicopter to a naval hospital where the unconscious diver was 
pronounced dead. 
 
June 1998 98/175 
Two divers were diving to a depth of 20m. Once one of them was down to 100 bar they started back towards 
the surface as planned. At 15m one of the divers indicated a problem with her buoyancy. Her buddy put air 
into her suit. They continued to 11m where she indicated that she was having problems breathing. Her buddy 
offered his alternative air source but this was pushed away. The distressed diver started to panic. The buddy 
managed to get to the surface but the panicking diver sank. She was recovered by other divers within minutes 
from 20m, but resuscitation attempts failed. 
 
June 1998 98/181 
Three divers conducted a wreck dive to 34m. After about 17 mins and at a depth of 25m they agreed to start 
their ascent. At about 20m the dive leader could see the other two divers in front of him. He then reached for a 
pocket in his suit and deployed a delayed SMB. When he looked back from this one of the divers was 
missing. Neither of them had seen the third diver go. They looked all around and concluded that he had 
ascended. They completed their ascent. At the surface they were recovered into their boat and discovered 
that the third diver was missing. They conducted a search and then alerted the Coastguard. An extensive 
surface search involving 5 lifeboats, 3 helicopters and many other surface craft failed to find the missing diver. 
The strong current prevented other divers from returning to the wreck. Later navy divers searched the site, but 
the missing diver was not found. This diver had been using a rebreather, the other two normal open circuit air 
sets. 
 
June 1998 98/200 
Two divers conducted a shore dive. About 40m off shore one indicated that she had a problem with her mask. 
Once at the surface the buddy towed her to the shore. At the shore she had difficulty breathing and lost 
consciousness. Resuscitation procedures were started and the emergency services alerted. She was flown by 
helicopter to a hospital where she died. It was subsequently revealed that the casualty had had a heart attack. 
The cause of death; heart attack and partial drowning. (Newspaper reports only) 
 
July 1998 98/187 
A diver entered the water, came to the surface, waved and then sank. It is thought that he then became 
snagged on a shotline a few meters below the surface. His buddies recovered him from the water, but he 
failed to respond to resuscitation techniques. 
 
July 1998 98/244 
Two divers on a drift dive descended to their target depth of 22m. As they went they paid out the SMB line. 
They exchanged OK signals during the descent. At the bottom one of the divers signalled OK to the other but 
got no response. He took hold of this diver and turned him round. His regulator was in place but he was not 

breathing. There was no body movement, his face was blank. The diver put some air into his BC and brought 
the casualty to the surface. He signalled the boat for help and commenced artificial ventilation of the casualty. 
The boat was soon alongside but they were unable to get the casualty on board. AV was continued in the 
water. The Coastguard had been called and a helicopter launched. Another boat arrived and they managed to 
get the casualty on board. Resuscitation continued and he was evacuated by helicopter to hospital. He was 
declared dead on arrival. He had suffered a major heart attack during the descent. 
 
BSAC Fatalities Against Membership 1982-1998 - (UK Data only) 
 
 
August 1998 98/250 
Two divers dived to a wreck at a depth of 50m. When they were 45 mins over due the diveboat skipper 
contacted the Coastguard. An extensive search was organised involving two helicopters, four lifeboats and a 
Royal Fleet Auxiliary ship. Navy and civilian divers searched the wreck. The divers were not found. The 
search was called off two days later. 
 
August 1998 98/257 
A diver had completed a dive on a wreck at a depth of 26m. Once out of the water he accidentally dropped his 
mask overboard. He re-entered the water to go down to retrieve the mask but he failed to re-surface. It is 
alleged that on re-entry he only had 50 bar in his diving cylinder, and he may also have had his BC direct feed 
disconnected. (Note - this comment updated from initial publication due to new information received) Other 
divers recovered the casualty and resuscitation attempts were made, but these failed.  
August 1998 98/264 
After a dive to a wreck, two divers exchanged the signal to surface. One of them failed to reach the surface. 
Other divers were unable to descend because of the increasing current. He was not found. 
 
August 1998 98/265 
After a dive to 30m a diver descended again to free a stuck anchor. He made this dive alone with 50 bar in a 
15l cylinder. His bubbles were observed for 10 mins then ceased. A navy search team later found his, 
apparently ditched, aqualung. The body has not been recovered. 
 
September 1998 98/269 
Three divers completed a dive, one using a rebreather. As the dive was ending one of the divers dropped a 
reel, and the diver with the rebreather went down to recover it. He did not return and the emergency services 
were alerted. Other divers conducted a search but kelp and increasing darkness prevented them finding the 
missing diver. His body was recovered the following day from a depth of 3m. His mouthpiece was in place, the 
oxygen cylinder is reported to have been turned off. Death was found to be due to drowning. 
 
September 1998 98/317 
An ex-club diver had been checking his mooring in about 5m when he surfaced unconscious. A local fishing 
vessel took him aboard and transferred him to the lifeboat where the doctor on the lifeboat was unable to 
resuscitate him. (Coastguard report) 
 
September 1998 98/274 
A 999 call was received from a group of divers reporting one of their party missing. Two lifeboats and a 
Helicopter were tasked to search. One of the lifeboats took the divers back to scene where they conducted an 
underwater search. In the meantime the other lifeboat located the diver on the surface. The lifeboat took the 
diver back to shore where the Doctor pronounced him dead. (Coastguard report) 
 
September 1998 98/291 
Two divers completed a dive to 20m for 18 mins. 5 hours later they commenced a second dive. 5 mins into 
this dive at a depth of 15m they exchanged signals to ascend. One of the divers came rapidly to the surface 

but the other did not surface. A search followed and the second diver was found minutes later in 26m with his 
regulator out of his mouth. He was brought to the surface but failed to respond to resuscitation attempts. 
 
September 1998 98/309 
Two divers conducted a wreck dive to 85m, one using open circuit trimix, the other a rebreather. After 21 mins 
they started their ascent up the shotline. It is believed that at 50m the diver on trimix experienced a 
malfunction of his BC and it started to inflate. He was unable to control this and made an ascent directly to the 
surface. At the surface he attempted to deflate his BC in order to conduct re-entry decompression. He could 
not deflate the BC. He passed out and was recovered into the boat. Resuscitation attempts were started and 
assistance requested from the Coastguard. The boat could not leave the site because the other diver was still 
underwater. Another boat arrived to cover the decompressing diver and the casualty was taken ashore but 
failed to recover. The other diver completed 83 mins of decompression and was recovered safely. 

NDC Diving Incidents Report 1998 
Decompression Incidents 
October 1997 98/319 
A diver was engaged in a training course. A series of six dives were conducted over 2 days. During one of 
these dives decompression stops were missed because another diver became disorientated and conducted a 
buoyant ascent. The following day the diver felt ill and was taken to a recompression facility for treatment. 
Significant residual symptoms remain. 
 
October 1997 98/325 
A rapid ascent from 10m led to an airlift for treatment for a diver. (Coastguard report) 
October 1997 98/326 
An urgency call was received reporting a diver with severe symptoms of DCI. The lifeboat intercepted the dive 
vessel and the diver was taken for treatment that lasted for 60 hours. Uncertain if total recovery will be made. 
(Coastguard & RNLI report) 
 
October 1997 98/049 
At the end of a week's diving a diver conducted two dives, the first to 44m for 35 mins with 21 mins 
decompression at 6m, the second to 35m for 41 mins with 7 mins decompression at 6m. All stops were 
conducted with nitrox. 2 hours after the last dive the diver noticed a pain in his right shoulder. He placed 
himself on oxygen for 30 mins but no improvement was achieved. He underwent a medical examination and 
was flown to a recompression chamber. Treatment resolved all symptoms. After a further 20 hours he noticed 
pain in his left ankle and was again recompressed. After this final treatment no further symptoms were 
experienced. 
 
 
Percentage Analysis of Factors Involved in Cases of DCI  
 
 
 
October 1997 98/050 
A diver conducted two dives to a depth of 33m. The first for 20 mins with 2 mins decompression at 6m, the 
second, 5 hours 53 mins later, for 28 mins with 8 mins decompression at 6m. As he was returning to the 
shore he felt dizzy and could not walk unassisted. He reported a 'funny' noise in his right ear. He was sick. He 
laid down to sleep for the night. At 6.30 the following morning he still felt unwell and rang HMS Vernon for 
advice. He was advised to report to the local hospital for examination. The diver was given two periods of 
recompression over two days. He was advised that he may have had an inner ear barotrauma. He reports 
that this treatment made no difference to his condition and that further specialist advice is being sought. He 
was advised to refrain from diving for 6 months. 
 
October 1997 98/062 
Three divers were diving together to a depth of 20m. Two were connected by a buddy line and the third 
holding hands with one of the other two. They started an ascent and one of the divers on the buddy line was 
incorrectly weighted and too heavy, and he put air into his BC to compensate. He then became too buoyant 
and made a rapid ascent from 6m to the surface, dragging the other diver up with the buddy line. The next 
day the diver who had been dragged to the surface experienced a tingling in his legs, he sought expert advice 
and was referred to a recompression facility. He was found to have no abnormal neurological conditions but 
was recompressed. This resolved the symptoms. The other divers were unaffected. 
 

November 1997 98/091 
Diver airlifted (100 miles) for treatment after a rapid ascent from 33 Metres. (Coastguard report) 
 
November 1997 98/093 
Recompression treatment was given to a diver following consultation with Aberdeen. This diver had suffered 
concussion 2 days before the dive was asthmatic and had a previous untreated bend. A brain scan showed a 
possible fractured skull and recompression treatment was carried out over 2 days. Dive was to 32 metres. 
(Newspaper report) 
 
November 1997 98/014 
Four divers went to a depth of 17m. After a short time at this depth they conducted the beginning of an 
assisted ascent, as a training drill. One of the divers closed the dump valve of his drysuit during this period. 
They then started a gradual ascent following a gently sloping bottom. The diver with the closed valve became 
buoyant and was unable to prevent himself being taken to the surface. The three buddies followed him. His 
computer recorded a fast ascent. Total dive time 15 mins. They re-descended to a depth of 7m and 
conducted mask and regulator clearing exercises. They practised a controlled buoyant lift and conducted 
another fast ascent with another computer warning. Total duration of this dive 5 mins. At the surface they 
practised towing and AV. After a 1 hour 40 mins surface interval they conducted another dive to 17m. They 
got lost underwater and surfaced to get their bearings. One of the divers again had difficulty controlling his 
ascent rate and got a third computer warning. They re-descended to 7m and completed the dive. Total 
duration on this occasion 21 mins. Later that day the diver who had made the fast ascents began to feel light-
headed and unsteady. A little later he developed a tingling sensation of the skin on both hands. He took two 
aspirin. He went to the local hospital casualty department. The tingling developed in both legs. He was placed 
on oxygen and given a series of medical tests. He was transferred to a recompression chamber and 
recompressed of 2 hours 30 mins on oxygen. The symptoms persisted after recompression and took a further 
two days to fully resolve. 
 
November 1997 98/107 
After a series of dives over a weekend, a diver surfaced from a 24m dive. The dive duration was 38 mins 
including 2 mins decompression. 17 hours had lapsed since the previous dive. 2 hours later the diver felt 
unwell and vomited. The following day the diver still felt unwell. Two weeks later he still had aches and pains 
in shoulder and elbow. He reported to a hospital casualty department and was referred to a recompression 
facility. He received recompression treatment. 
 
November 1997 98/330 
A lady recently back from a diving trip to the Red Sea reported to Hospital with symptoms of DCI. The 
Coastguard was asked to assist in the evacuation to the recompression facility at Millport. (Coastguard report)
 
November 1997 98/080 
12 mins into a dive and at a depth of 35m the inflation valve of a diver's drysuit stuck in the open position. The 
diver was forced into a rapid ascent to the surface. He quickly experienced a pain in the back of his legs and 
was recompressed. This resolved his symptoms. 
 
November 1997 98/073 
A diver conducted a dive to 16m for a duration of 25 mins. 2 hours 5 mins later he again dived to 15m for 17 
mins. During this second dive the diver became buoyant and ascended rapidly from 6m to the surface. He 
was unable to dump air from BCD or drysuit, and believes that air was trapped in his drysuit, possibly below 
his weightbelt. 5 mins later he dived again to recover a shot weight that had become stuck. He carried / 
'bounced' the shot weight (15kg) up a slope to a depth of 3m. Exhausted he swam ashore and dekitted. Early 
the following morning he experienced a dull ache in his shoulder. He sought medical advice and was 
recompressed. Subsequent tests revealed no abnormalities. Some pain remained two weeks later. 
 
January 1998 98/100 
After a dive to 22m for 48 mins a diver was at 18m when he ran out of air. His contents gauge still showed 40 
bar. He shared air with his buddy and they surfaced missing decompression stops. The following day the 
diver reported 'pins and needles' in his shoulder and was advised to contact a recompression facility. It is not 
believed that this diver was recompressed. 
 
January 1998 98/094 
Shore dive to a wreck at 46 metres with an elapsed time of 32 mins resulted in a diver having a vesticular 
embolism. This diver missed 55 minutes of stops but the computer read OK. (Coastguard & RNLI report) 
 
January 1998 98/096 
During a training dive to 34m using nitrox 30 a diver's regulator froze and started to free flow. His buddy took 
hold of him and they started to ascend. At 15m buoyancy control was lost and they descended again to 27m. 

At this point the diver with the free flow indicated urgently that he had on 70 bar left in his cylinder. The buddy 
was unable to release his octopus regulator. The buddy vented all the air from his own BCD and suit and 
taking a good grip on the diver with the free flow he opened the emergency cylinder on the BCD of the free 
flowing diver. They reached the surface safely. 1 hour 40 mins later they again dived to 22m for 20 mins, 
using air. During the ascent one diver conducted 7 to 8 mins of decompression stops at 5m. The second did 
not complete stops. On surfacing the first diver carried out a towing exercise on the second. The following day 
the first diver awoke feeling tired with a mild pain in his left shoulder. Towards the end of the day the pain 
worsened, the diver sought medical advice and was recompressed. 
 
January 1998 98/103 
Two divers required treatment after one of them ran out of air at 29 metres and both made a rapid ascent 
missing stops. (Coastguard report) 
Two divers were at 30m when one had a problem with her air supply and became unconscious. Her buddy 
brought her to the surface. Both divers were flown by helicopter to a recompression facility for treatment. The 
unconscious diver recovered. (Newspaper report) 
 
February 1998 98/123 
Two divers who had dived a Loch on the West Coast earlier in the day began to feel unwell once home on the 
East Coast. An ambulance took them to the local hospital then they were airlifted to Aberdeen for treatment. 
(Coastguard report) 
 
February 1998 98/333 
Following a no stop dive to 30m one of the group reported his computer was showing SOS but was showing 
no symptoms. He was given oxygen and the Coastguard was contacted for advice. This was passed on from 
the duty dive doctor in Oban and the diver was advised not to return home via the mountain pass road straight 
away but to delay and report to doctor as soon as possible. (Coastguard report) 
 
February 1998 98/120 
Five divers commenced a dive to a maximum depth of 35m. 20 mins into the dive they ascended to 22m, at 
this point one diver left the group, as planned, and ascended to the surface. At 45 mins the other divers 
started to decrease depth to 18m. After 50 mins they ascended a shotline to 15m and started decompression. 
They switched to nitrox 50. 1 min later they ascended to 6m, now 61 mins into the dive. At 74 mins one of the 
divers was observed to be suffering from the cold and failed to respond immediately to signals. She was 
shivering and indicated that she wanted to leave the water. At 80 mins this diver was showing signs of stress, 
and a slow ascent was started. They arrived at 3m at 84 mins and were back on the surface at 86 mins. Out 
of the water the diver complained of cold and shortly afterwards of 'pins and needles' in her hands, and an 
ache in her right shoulder. She also had a mottled rash on the right side of her chest. She could not grip with 
her right hand. This diver was recompressed. She is thought to have had an oxygen convulsion whilst in the 
chamber. A full recovery was made. 
 
March 1998 98/119 
Two divers completed a dive to 20m for 33 mins with no stops. 1 hour 18 mins later they dived again to 20m 
and conducted two controlled buoyant lift drills from 20m to the surface. The total time of this second set of 
dives was 16 mins. The following day three short dives were conducted to a maximum of 6m for periods of 9, 
3, and 11 mins. The following day one of the divers noted a tingling and numbness of the left cheek. This 
spread to include the left arm and thigh. He sought medical advice. Early the following day he received 
recompression treatment, with further treatments over the next two days. 
 
March 1998 98/340 
An uncontrolled ascent on a training dive from 17m caused an arterial gas embolism and the casualty was 
evacuated by helicopter for treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
April 1998 98/132 
A diver conducted a dive to 27m for 27 mins. 1 to 1 hour 30 mins later he conducted another dive to 20m for 
30 mins. Overnight he experienced a numbness in his right hand, pins and needles, and then the same in his 
shoulder and neck. He sought medical advice and was recompressed. He was kept overnight in hospital. The 
following day he still had problems with his right hand, neck and face, and further recompression was 
conducted. During recompression the symptoms came and went. It was subsequently concluded that bruising 
not DCI may have been the cause. 
 
April 1998 98/342 
A surface interval of less than one hour between dives to 27m contributed to a diver suffering DCI with partial 
paralysis. The early administration of oxygen proved very beneficial and after treatment made a full recovery. 
(Coastguard report) 
 

April 1998 98/343 
Following an uneventful dive to 28m with all stops carried out, a diver felt unwell on surfacing. Helicopter 
evacuation was made and 7 hours of treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
April 1998 98/345 
A missed decompression stop after a 31m dive resulted in an airlift for extended treatment. (Coastguard 
report) 
 
April 1998 98/136 
33 mins into a wreck dive to a maximum depth of 36m a diver became separated from his buddy. He checked 
around and then started an ascent. At 15m he deployed a delayed SMB. He started to sink back down and 
put air into his drysuit. Winding the SMB line in he arrived at 9m where he discovered that the inlet valve to his 
suit had jammed and was continuing to let air flow. He tried to disconnect the hose but could not. He tried his 
shoulder dump but that would not release air quickly enough. He made a rapid ascent to the surface. 
Recovered into the boat he was placed on oxygen. 5 mins later he experienced 'pins and needles' over his 
whole body. He was flown by helicopter to a recompression facility for treatment. 
 
May 1998 98/356 
Problems with DV at 56m caused a diver to ascend rapidly missing stops. The CG helicopter airlifted him for 
treatment at Haslar. (Coastguard report) 
 
May 1998 98/154 
A short while after a dive to 18m for 30 mins, with 1 min stop at 6m, a diver reported a loss of feeling to his left 
arm, side and leg. He was placed on oxygen. Diver and buddy were flown to a recompression facility and the 
casualty was recompressed. 
 
May 1998 98/141 
Two buddy pairs dived together to a depth of 35m. After 1 min at this depth, one of the divers signalled that 
she did not feel happy. She was seen to be in some distress. A normal ascent was made including a 2 mins 
stop at 6m. Once ashore the casualty was quiet and had some dizziness, was cold and felt unwell. 1 hour 
later she was worse and was taken to the local hospital. She was flown from here to a recompression facility. 
A suspected cerebral bend was diagnosed and she was recompressed. The site is a quarry at a height above 
250m above sea level. 
 
 
Decompression Incidents by Month 
 
 
May 1998 98/145 
Two pairs of divers entered the water to dive to a wreck, their maximum depth was to be 54m. They 
descended the shotline and the water became very dark. At 45m the shotline was horizontal. One of the 
divers swam ahead and then turned to check his buddy. He could see torch lights behind him and he returned 
to his buddy, the depth was 54m. The buddy indicated that he was not happy and ascend signals were 
exchanged. The buddy's hand was gripping the shotline tightly and had to be released. He was not 
responsive and the first diver went to inflate his buddy's suit. He could not do this since the inflator had come 
off the suit and they sank to he bottom at a depth of 60m. He managed to refit the inflator and, with the buddy 
still unresponsive, he closed the auto dump on the buddy's suit and started to bring them both to the surface. 
They ascended quite rapidly to about 35m and switched to their second cylinders since both were low on air. 
At 12m they deployed a delayed SMB and ascended to 6m. The distressed diver wanted to go directly to the 
surface but his buddy restrained him and they completed 6 mins of stops with the rescuing diver using 75% 
nitrox. Back on the boat the distress diver was given oxygen and the other continued to breathe his 75% mix. 
The distressed diver complained of pain in the arm and 'pins and needles' in the hip area, the other diver had 
'pins and needles' in his eye socket. Both were flown by helicopter to a recompression facility, both were 

recompressed, with the distressed diver needing a second recompression treatment. 
 
May 1998 98/205 
Two divers were on a wreck at a depth of 30m. After 10 mins they started to make their way back to the 
shotline. At this point one of the divers had a problem clearing her mask and in trying to resolve the problem 
knocked her own regulator from her mouth. She panicked, inflated her BC and made a buoyant ascent to the 
surface. The other diver was reeling a distance line and did not see this happen. When she discovered her 
buddy missing she cut the distance line and made her ascent. At the surface both divers were recovered into 
boats. The diver who had made the rapid ascent was placed on oxygen and Coastguard assistance was 
called. The casualty was airlifted to a recompression facility. 
 
May 1998 98/357 
Inadequate surface intervals were contributory factors to this diver requiring extended treatment. He was 
airlifted 70 miles by the Coastguard helicopter for treatment at the Dunbeg facility. (Coastguard report) 
 
May 1998 98/359 
Another rapid ascent, this time due to dump valve failure on a second dive at 28m caused pain and tingling 
down a diver's upper right torso. First dive of the day was to 48m. Surface interval unknown. Airlifted for 
treatment at Poole. (Coastguard report) 
 
May 1998 98/150 
A diver conducted a series of four dives over a two day period. The fourth dive was to a depth of 33m for a 
dive time of 31 mins. They made a rapid ascent from 18 to 11m due to a jammed delayed SMB reel. They 
completed 6 mins of decompression stops. 1 hour after the dive one of the divers reported an itching rash. He 
was placed on oxygen and given fluids. He was taken to a recompression facility and received treatment. He 
was subsequently advised not to dive for two months. 
 
May 1998 98/360 
After missing a stop a diver carried out in water recompression on nitrox 80. Diver later taken by road to the 
Poole facility for treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
May 1998 98/362 
Either accidental or equipment failure of stab jacket inflation caused a rapid ascent during which the diver held 
his breath resulting in an embolism. The diver was airlifted to Poole for treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
May 1998 98/198 
A diver conducted a dive to 28m for 31 mins including 2 mins stops at 6m. Shortly after this dive, back in the 
boat, he began to feel seasick and was unable to stand steadily. He started to go deaf in his right ear and had 
tinnitus. He was placed on oxygen, the Coastguard was alerted and the boat returned to harbour. He was 
transported to a recompression facility and received a course of 6 treatments. He spent a week in hospital but 
made a good recovery. The diagnosis was a vestibular bend. He recalls having to work hard during the 
ascent, his computer print out shows a high breathing rate, and it is postulated that this increased his nitrogen 
uptake and thus promoted the bend. 
 
May 1998 98/166 
A diver with DCI was taken to a recompression facility. (Newspaper report only). 
 
May 1998 98/168 
A diver surfaced after a dive to 14m with chest pain. She managed to struggle to rocks but briefly lost 
consciousness. She was rescued by helicopter and taken for recompression treatment. (RNLI & Newspaper 
report) 
 
May 1998 98/169 
A diver who became separated from the group ascending the shot line from a depth of 30 metres made a fast 
ascent and surfaced semi-conscious with pain in the shoulder and knee. The diver was airlifted for extended 
treatment at Plymouth. (Coastguard report) 
 
May 1998 98/365 
Following a dive to 17m a novice diver under supervision displayed signs of DCI although dive was well within 
limits. Airlifted for precautionary treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
May 1998 98/366 
Another precautionary recompression for a diver whose dive profile was normal and buddy was unaffected. 
(Coastguard & RNLI report) 
 

May 1998 98/267 
After a dive to 31m for a total of 27 mins, including 1 min stop at 3m, a diver noticed a loss of feeling in his 
legs for a short time. He was given oxygen, the symptoms lessened. An unusual sensation remained and two 
days later the diver sought medical advice from a recompression facility. He received three sessions of 
treatment, the third session made no change to the residual symptoms. These subsequently gradually 
became fully resolved. 
 
May 1998 98/174 
Diving to 36 metres and missing a stop resulted in evacuation of a diver initially by ambulance to hospital then 
by helicopter for treatment in Plymouth. (Coastguard report) 
A diver on her first dive of the day, surfaced missing decompression stops. Once ashore she complained of 
'pins and needles'. She was given oxygen and taken to hospital by ambulance. She was then flown to a 
recompression facility for treatment. (Newspaper report) 
 
May 1998 98/368 
Two divers missed all stops after a dive to 36m and were airlifted by CG helicopter for treatment. (Coastguard 
report) 
 
May 1998 98/369 
On returning to shore a diver developed a rash and aching to the shoulders. The ambulance was called and 
transported the diver to a waiting Coastguard helicopter for transfer to Poole recompression. (Coastguard 
report) 
 
May 1998 98/185 
Two divers completed a dive to 37m for 61 mins, including 24 mins stops. 5 hours 37 mins later they again 
dived to 37m for 24 mins. During the ascent from this second dive, one of the divers lost control of his 
buoyancy and ascended directly to the surface missing 4 mins of stops. He was recovered into a boat and 
given oxygen and water to drink. The diver had no symptoms and returned home. Later he decided to seek 
medical advice and he was given four session of recompression treatment. His buddy had correctly 
completed his stops, but the following day felt 'pins and needles' in his hands and feet. He too was given 
precautionary recompression treatment. 
 
May 1998 98/204 
Two divers planned a drift dive to 25m in a 1 kn. current with a 24 min dive time. They found the seabed at 
32m and the current 2 kn. After 20 mins one of the divers had only 70 bar remaining, they began their ascent. 
After 23 mins they were at 22m, the 70 bar cylinder was down to 10 bar, and the other diver had 50 bar. They 
shared air using an alternative air source. Difficulty was experienced reeling in the SMB line. The pair then 
touched the seabed at 27m with the remaining air at 30 bar. They finned for the surface and ignored the SMB 
reel. They slowed their ascent at 10m but surfaced at 26 mins, having missed 2 mins stops at 6m. They were 
recovered into the boat, which had no oxygen. The engine took 45 mins to start. Neither showed signs of DCI 
in the boat. 2 hours later one developed a tingling in his fingers and another hour later the other had joint 
pains in his elbow. They were taken to a recompression facility but it was decided that no treatment was 
necessary. They were advised not to dive for 24 hours. 
 
May 1998 98/177 
A diver completed a series of two dives with a 3 hour 45 mins surface interval. The first was to 19m for 50 
mins with a 1 mins stop at 6m. The second was to 31m for 40 mins including 1 min at 9m, 5 min at 6m and 1 
min at 3m. 2 hours after the last dive he had a pain in his right shoulder and a skin rash. The Coastguard was 
alerted and the casualty was given recompression treatment. He made a full recovery and was advised not to 
dive for 6 weeks. 
 
June 1998 98/180 
Three divers completed a dive to 47m. They started their ascent 26 mins into the dive using a delayed SMB 
deployed by one of the group. At 20m one of the divers felt too light and, despite dumping air from suit and 
BC, was not able to stop the ascent. He took hold of one of the other divers who also tried to control the 
ascent. At about 4m he was released by the other diver and ascended buoyantly to the surface. His computer 
indicated that he needed to recompress to 12m for 45 mins. He tried to re-descend to his buddies but was not 
able to do so. He was recovered into the boat and placed on oxygen. The Coastguard was alerted and a 
helicopter transported him to a recompression facility. He experienced brief 'pins and needles' in his left arm 
and leg during the journey. Medical examination revealed no symptoms of DCS. He was given 5 hours 
recompression treatment. No subsequent ill effects were experienced. This diver reports that he was diving 
with a new set up and was not correctly weighted for twin cylinders and that as they emptied he became too 
buoyant. 
 
June 1998 98/195 

A diver had completed a series of two dives per day with a break on one of the days. On the last day he dived 
to 50m for 30 mins with 5 mins stop at 6m. 2 mins after surfacing he developed a mild pain in his right arm. 
Oxygen was administered and the diver was taken by lifeboat to a recompression facility. The symptoms were 
almost totally resolved after recompression treatment. 
 
June 1998 98/171 
A diver was treated at a recompression facility having been brought ashore suffering from 'pins and needles'. 
(Newspaper report only) 
 
June 1998 98/197 
Three divers conducted a dive to 29m. Their swim to the wreck involved some distance against a current. 
After approximately 20 mins they launched a delayed SMB in preparation to surface. At about 18m one of the 
divers realised that he was surfacing too rapidly and took hold of another of the divers who was holding an 
SMB reel. The buddy noticed air escaping from the inflator / dump device of the buoyant diver's BC. Unsure of 
the problem he tried to dump air from this device and eventually brought the ascent to a halt at 4m. Believing 
all to be well he released the other diver and began to reel in the SMB line. Shortly afterwards the once 
buoyant diver was seen to be descending rapidly. The third diver took hold of the descending diver at 11m 
and put some air into his jacket. They all the ascended quite quickly to the surface. Once at the surface the 
diver with buoyancy problems seemed to be alright at first and then became unresponsive and collapsed. He 
was recovered into the boat and found to have no pulse. People in the boat commenced resuscitation and the 
other divers were recovered. Assistance was sought by radio. The diver's pulse returned and he was placed 
on oxygen. He was taken by helicopter to a recompression facility, where he received treatment. The other 
divers were also placed on oxygen and flown in for examination, although no problems were found. The 
casualty regained consciousness although he suffered short-term memory loss. He was diagnosed as having 
a cerebral embolism. A full recovery was anticipated. 
 
June 1998 98/315 
Three divers completed a wreck dive to 22m for 42 mins with a 3 min stop at 6m. 2 hours 30 mins later they 
dived again to 23m for 51 mins. During the ascent from the second dive one of them became separated whilst 
the other two were sorting out a delayed SMB. He came up slowly with no stops indicated by his computer. 
The others conducted a safety stop. 1 hour after surfacing the lone diver experienced pain in his right arm, 
and he thought that he had pulled a muscle whilst climbing back into the boat. The following day the pain was 
worse and he went to hospital. He was referred to a recompression facility for treatment. 
 
June 1998 98/201 
Two divers suffering from DCI were flown by helicopter to hospital. They are reported to have surfaced too 
quickly. They were sent home after treatment. (Newspaper reports only) 
 
June 1998 98/229 
A diver completed a dive to 28m for 49 mins including stops at 9m, 6m and 3m for 1 min, 3 min and 8 mins 
respectively. 5 hours 27 mins later he dived again to 30m. During this dive he became separated from his 
buddy and, after 35 mins, started his ascent up the shotline. At 10m he deployed a delayed SMB. During the 
deployment he had become buoyant and 'floated' to the surface at a slow rate. Once on the surface he got 
into the boat and reported that he had missed stops. 15 mins after surfacing he reported pain in the small of 
his back and later 'pins and needles' in his legs. He was given nitrox 40. Assistance was sought by radio and 
after recovering the last dive pair the boat headed back to harbour. An ambulance and helicopter were 
waiting. He was taken to hospital but discharged as he had no signs of DCI. The next morning he had pain in 
his back and was sent to a recompression facility for treatment. 
 
June 1998 98/374 
Too many ascents and descents caused DCI to an Instructor carrying out training. The diver was taken by 
ambulance for recompression treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
June 1998 98/375 
On his third dive to 30m over two days a diver showed classic signs of DCI and was airlifted for treatment. 
(Coastguard report) 
 
June 1998 98/378 
Following what seemed to be a incident free dive to 25m a diver had tingling in legs and felt nauseous. He 
was taken the recompression facility by helicopter. (Coastguard report) 
 
June 1998 98/380 
Recompression treatment was given to a diver with quite a normal dive profile who had however suffered DCI 
eight months earlier. (Coastguard report) 
 

June 1998 98/381 
A diver who made a fast ascent and showed signs of DCI was airlifted for treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
June 1998 98/182 
A diver completed the last dive of a week's diving trip. This was the second dive of the day. The first to 36m 
for 25 mins with no stops, the second to 24m for 33 mins with 2 mins stops. 20 mins after the last dive he 
experienced a chest ache and tingling in his legs. He was given oxygen, and the boat headed for harbour. 
The skipper alerted the emergency services by radio. During the trip back, all the oxygen was used up and 
the casualty was given nitrox 40. Once ashore the casualty was with out symptoms. He was taken to a 
recompression facility and treated for 6 hours, with a further 90 mins the following day. He was told that he 
had had a spinal and cerebral bend. 
 
Decompression Data Source Analysis 
 
 
 
July 1998 98/383 
An airlift was arranged for a diver who had DCI after a dive to 22m for 37 mins but had failed to carry out any 
stops. (Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/249 
A diver conducted a dive to 31m for 30 mins with 11 mins decompression at 6m. He noticed an ache in his 
right shoulder but did not report it. 2 hours 23 mins later he dived again to 20m for 38 mins, and completed 2 
mins of stops at 6m. The shoulder ache was still present but he put it down to a muscular tear and refused 
oxygen. That night the pain made it difficult for him to sleep. The following day he attended a recompression 
facility. He received two courses of treatment and an uneventful recovery was made. He had had a type 1 
bend in his left shoulder 5 years earlier. 
 
July 1998 98/239 
Two divers reported the onset of DCI symptoms after a dive to 12.5m. I am unsure of this dive profile as a 5 
hour treatment was required ! (Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/221 
Following a rapid ascent a diver was put ashore then the Coastguard were contacted. The diver was then 
transferred to the recompression facility by helicopter. (Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/242 
Buoyancy control problems resulted in a diver missing 14 mins of stops. The diver was airlifted for treatment. 
(Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/313 
Two divers completed a dive to 43m. During the ascent one of the pair deployed a delayed SMB to enable 
then to conduct decompression stops. The reel jammed and as it was connected to the diver it dragged him to 
the surface. His buddy did not see him ascend and completed his stops before ascending. The first diver had 
missed about 3 mins stops at 6m. He was placed on oxygen and the boat headed back to harbour. Once 
ashore the diver had no symptoms. However during his journey home he felt unwell and drove to hospital. He 
received two sessions of recompression treatment. 
 
July 1998 98/394 
After a dive to 43m a diver made a rapid ascent from 7m missing stops. He was airlifted for treatment. 
(Coastguard report) 
 

July 1998 98/397 
Symptoms of DCI were shown by a diver once back onshore who had made a rapid ascent from 22m. The 
diver was airlifted for treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/398 
Missing stops after a 41m dive resulted in treatment for two divers. (Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/399 
A diver was airlifted to hospital with suspected DCI (few details) (Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/247 
Two divers were at a depth of 34m when one was hit in the face by a large jellyfish. It stung her severely. She 
signalled that she wished to ascend. They made their way back to the shotline. They made a quick ascent but 
carried out a stop at 6m. Total dive time was 23 mins. Back on board boat her condition worsened, she felt 
sick and had 'pins and needles'. The other divers were recalled and the boat returned to harbour. The 
casualty was taken by ambulance to hospital where she was given a saline drip and oxygen. Because of the 
'pins and needles' and rashes on her wrists she was flown to a recompression facility for treatment. This 
treatment resolved the symptoms. The buddy showed no adverse symptoms. This incident took place in the 
North Sea. 
 
July 1998 98/246 
A diver conducted two dives, the first to 22m for 28 mins, the second, 4 hours 51 mins later to 15m for 31 
mins, both with a 1 min stop at 6m. That evening he drank a large amount of alcohol and awoke the following 
day with 'pins and needles' in his left forearm and hand and his right hand. Later that day he reported to 
hospital because the symptoms had not resolved. He attended a recompression facility. 
 
July 1998 98/323 
Another airlift for a diver who had pain and in the elbow and 'pins and needles' in the right hand. Profile not 
known. (Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/322 
A missed 3m stop brought on symptoms of DCI after a dive to 32m. The diver was airlifted for treatment. 
(Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/403 
Due to poor visibility at 44m the dive was aborted but one diver dropped his weightbelt and made an 
uncontrolled ascent. Initial treatment was carried out locally but after little improvement he was airlifted to 
Aberdeen. Total recovery is doubtful. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/260 
Two divers commenced a dive to a wreck in a depth of 27m. On the way down the shotline one of them 
thought that she had been stung by a jellyfish. They conducted a normal dive, arriving back at 6m after 26 
mins. Here they completed a 1 mins safety stop before surfacing. Back on the boat the diver felt sick. Then 
both her feet went numb and began to tingle and ache. At first she thought that this was just through sitting in 
the boat. She reported this to others and was placed on oxygen. She was taken to hospital and then flown to 
a recompression facility for treatment. She was finally released from hospital. 
 
August 1998 98/312 
Two divers completed a dive to a maximum depth of 33m for a total time of 30 mins which included 1 min at 
6m and a planned 4 mins at 3m. During the 3m stop, one of the pair had buoyancy control problems and 
ascended to the surface, the other completed the stops. The diver who had missed stops was placed on 
nitrox 80 and monitored for symptoms; none were found. This diver had been diving with nitrox 32 but using 
an air computer. The following day, although still without symptoms, the diver who had missed stops was 
persuaded to seek medical advice at a recompression facility. Here it was felt that the diver's pupil response 
and reflexes were slow and he was recompressed. This resulted in little change. He was advised not to dive 
for 24 hours. 
 
August 1998 98/255 
A diver spent 5 hours in a recompression chamber after suffering a severe pain in his shoulder following a 
dive. (Newspaper report only). 
 
August 1998 98/405 
Following a dive to 59m on trimix (with a previous dive of 62m two days prior) this diver showed symptoms of 
DCI and was airlifted for treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 

August 1998 98/406 
After his sixth dive in four days (dives getting progressively deeper) this diver developed severe neurological 
DCI. Although extended treatment was given he was advised not to dive again. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/268 
Upon surfacing from a dive to 30m for 26 mins, including a 1 min stop at 3m, a diver reported 'pins and 
needles' in his feet. He was wearing thick socks and put it down to the tightness of his drysuit boots. On 
returning to shore he also noted 'pins and needles' in his hands. He was wearing a new drysuit with tight wrist 
seals and when he removed this the sensation in his hands went away. The sensation in his feet was still 
present but declining. It was decided that he should monitor the condition. Later that day the symptoms were 
still present and he sought medical advice. He was advised to keep monitoring the situation. The following 
evening the symptoms were still present and the diver was given a series of recompression treatments over a 
seven day period. After this he was left with a loss of power to his left leg and sensory nerve loss to both 
lower legs. He was referred to a consultant neurologist. 
 
August 1998 98/298 
A diver was treated in a recompression facility after he complained of a numbness in his leg and hip. 
(Newspaper report only). 
 
August 1998 98/277 
Two divers were diving on a wreck at a depth of 32m. The current was strong and when one of them released 
the shotweight from the wreck it was swept away. They pulled themselves along the wreck but the current 
grew stronger and they prepared to ascend. They held onto the wreck whilst one tried to deploy a delayed 
SMB. He dropped and lost a reel and then deployed the SMB with a second reel. They were swept off the 
wreck and landed on the seabed. The diver with the reel took hold of his buddy by wrapping his legs around 
him. This prevented the second diver from achieving neutral buoyancy since the air escaped from the neck of 
his drysuit. He released himself from this grip and was able to become buoyant. The first diver then took 
another grip on the second but released a shoulder strap in the process. He took a more secure grip. The first 
diver's mask flooded twice during the ascent. He struggled with the SMB reel and then abandoned it. He 
became concerned at the situation and made them both buoyant to ensure that they reached the surface. 
Their ascent became fast. The second diver tried to release the grip on him but failed. They arrived at the 
surface and were recovered into their boat. Their total dive time had been 14 mins. Early the following 
morning one of the divers awoke with a tingling sensation in his right hand. He rang for medical assistance 
and was advised to report to a recompression facility. He was recompressed and this fully resolved his 
symptoms. 
 
August 1998 98/409 
A diver who felt unwell at home some hours after a dive rang the Coastguard who arranged for an ambulance 
to take the diver for precautionary treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/414 
The lifeboat transferred a diver with suspected DCI to a waiting ambulance. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/415 
Two divers with DCI airlifted for treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/416 
After a second dive to 31m a diver developed signs of DCI. No oxygen could be administered as the charter 
boat had used it all the same morning following another incident. (Lesson here). The diver was airlifted for 
treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/271 
A diver conducted a drift dive to 18m for 23 mins including a 2 mins stop at 6m. The following day, 20 hours 
later, he dived again to 30m on a wreck. During the dive he became separated from his buddy and ascended 
to 25m because of buoyancy problems. He re-descended and re-grouped with his buddy. They ascended to 
20m and, some time later, the diver again lost control of his buoyancy, making a rapid ascent to 7m. He 
managed to make a 1 min stop before rising rapidly to the surface. His computer indicated no stops missed. 
Early the following morning the diver experienced pain in his chest and left shoulder. At mid-day he reported 
to his local hospital. He was placed on oxygen and transported to a recompression facility for treatment. The 
symptoms resolved. The diver reported problems with the use of his drysuit cuff dump. 
 
August 1998 98/417 
Upon losing his weightbelt his buddy held on to attempt to slow the ascent, this was unsuccessful and both 
made a rapid ascent missing stops. Both were flown to the recompression facility for treatment. (Coastguard 
report) 

 
August 1998 98/421 
A rapid ascent from 28m due to a diver not being able to dump air from BC with buddy also ascending at 
same speed caused DCI in both and they airlifted for treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/294 
A diver surfaced too quickly because he was afraid of being stung by jellyfish that were known to be in the 
area. Soon after surfacing he complained of numbness and pain in his back. He is reported to have had a 
serious spinal bend and was taken to a recompression facility for treatment. This incident took place off the 
West Coast of Scotland. (Newspaper report). 
 
August 1998 98/290 
Two divers completed a dive to 37m for a total time of 57 mins that included decompression stops indicated 
by their dive computers. One of the computers showed 9 mins more stops than the other. They both followed 
the most conservative computer. 30 mins after surfacing one of the pair thought that she had a dull ache in 
her left arm. She was placed on oxygen for 20 mins and the condition resolved. No subsequent ill effects were 
reported. 
 
August 1998 98/293 
Five divers surfaced without completing the required decompression stops. They were taken by inshore 
lifeboat to harbour to meet a waiting ambulance. At first they showed no symptoms. An hour later their 
condition deteriorated and they were taken back to sea and winched into a helicopter. They were then flown 
to a recompression facility. (Newspaper report). 
 
August 1998 98/321 
The Coastguard was contacted when a member of a diving party started to cough up blood and show serious 
symptoms of DCI. She was flown by helicopter to hospital for treatment. (Newspaper report). 
 
August 1998 98/292 
A diver suffering from DCI was given recompression treatment. (Newspaper report only). 
 
August 1998 98/426 
After a 25m dive probably with insufficient stops a diver developed severe chest pains and 'pins and needles' 
in both legs. She was airlifted for treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/429 
Two divers who had surfaced from a 45m dive and missing a stop were given precautionary treatment. 
(Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/430 
Using nitrox a dive to 43m with normal profile still resulted in symptoms of DCI. The diver was airlifted for 
treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/435 
A diver was airlifted for treatment after complaining of dizziness and some facial numbness. (Coastguard 
report) 
 
September 1998 98/304 
Severe symptoms of DCI were shown by a diver after a 36m dive. The casualty was ashore but due to the 
terrain had to be winched into the helicopter then flown a short distance for treatment. This diver was later 
transferred to Oban as his condition deteriorated and as he could not be flown to Aberdeen due to fog. 
(Coastguard report) 
 
September 1998 98/440 
A diver with DCI was transferred from a dive charter boat to the lifeboat and taken for treatment. (Coastguard 
report) 
 
September 1998 98/308 
Three divers commenced a drift dive to an anticipated maximum depth of 20m. They reached the seabed at 
30m. The current was strong. One of the three prepared a delayed SMB, the other two divers checked one of 
the pair's dive computer. When they looked back the third diver was not to be seen. The lone diver ascended. 
The other two deployed their own SMB and made their ascent. At the surface all were recovered into their 
boat. 15 mins later, the diver who had ascended alone complained of a pain in his ankle. He was placed on 
oxygen and assistance requested. This diver was airlifted to a recompression facility. He had previously dived 
to 30m for 33 mins and the surface interval was 3 hours 22 mins. The duration of the second dive was 7 mins.

NDC Diving Incidents Report 1998 
Injury / Illness 
 
October 1997 98/006 
Three divers dived to 33m, using masks with 'buddy phones'. The divers re-ascended to 20m and one 
became breathless. She was brought to the surface slowly by her buddies. On the surface she was given 
oxygen and taken by ambulance to hospital. She had a headache and was very pale. She was discharged 
from hospital in less than two hours. 
 
October 1997 98/048 
On his first dive a trainee surfaced normally but was sick at the surface. He was towed to the shore, dekitted 
and then was sick once again. The diver is reported to have been disorientated and felt dizzy when he moved 
his head underwater. He was also cold. 
 
November 1997 98/059 
A trainee diver was on his first open water dive. He was unable to equalise pressure in his ears and felt 
extreme pain. He was brought to the surface by his instructor. Damage to the eardrums was considered 
possible and he was advised to seek medical advice. His diver suffers a condition that results in his having 
little strength in his facial muscles and was thus using a full-face mask. 
 
December 1997 98/077 
Shortly after a 35 mins dive to 21m, including a 10 mins decompression stop, a diver suffered a suspected 
stroke. The diver was taken to hospital where the diagnosis of a slight stroke was confirmed. The diver was 
recompressed as a precaution. 
 
December 1997 98/071 
Two divers descended to a depth of 30m. At this depth one planned to practice mask clearing. He removed 
his mask and then started to breathe heavily. He started to float up and his buddy took hold of his arm and 
guided him down onto some rocks. The maskless diver indicated that he wanted to ascend and his buddy 
lifted him to the surface with a controlled buoyant lift. The maskless diver held his nose during the ascent. 
One of the divers' dive computers indicated a fast ascent. No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
 
January 1998 98/097 
Two divers entered an underwater 'blockhouse'. As they made to exit another pair of divers also left. After his 
exit the dive leader realised that his companion had not come out. Back inside he found the buddy 
unconscious with mask off and regulator out of her mouth. The dive leader tried to give his octopus regulator 
but it was not accepted. With the help of other divers the unconscious diver was brought to the surface where 
she was found to be breathing. Taken ashore by boat she quickly recovered. It is suggested that the 
unconscious diver may have a heart condition. 
 
March 1998 98/106 
An instructor with two trainees entered the water and signalled the first trainee to enter. The trainee conducted 
a stride entry and struck on of her legs on a rock. She fractured both tibia and fibula. She was taken by 
ambulance to hospital for treatment. 
 
March 1998 98/118 
Two divers entered the water, for one it was his first open water dive. The first descent was aborted because 
the trainee needed more weight. During the second descent the trainee indicated trouble with ear clearing and 
they paused at 3m whilst this was resolved. The dive then continued for 20 mins to a depth of 6m. They then 
made a slow ascent. Whilst de-kitting after the dive a small amount of blood was noted to be coming from the 
trainee's ear. Two days later the ear was inflamed and infected and the diver felt unwell. He sought medical 
advice and was given antibiotics. Subsequent re-examination 12 days after the incident indicated that the ear 
had fully recovered. 
 
April 1998 98/133 
Two divers conducted a dive to 21m for 26 mins. On exit from the water one of the pair started to 'pass out'. 
He had only been using thermal underwear under a membrane drysuit. He was very cold. The diver was 
taken into a warm environment and quickly recovered. 
 
April 1998 98/147 
A diver completed a dive to 7m for 31 mins. 2 hours later she dived again, to 4m for 25 mins. After the second 

dive she reported numbness and tingling in her arms. The following day she also had visual disturbances. 
Breathing oxygen she went to a recompression facility and was recompressed. The symptoms did not resolve 
and she was admitted to hospital. Tests the next day included an MRI scan; no abnormalities were found. She 
was referred to her own GP for further investigation, as it was concluded that no DCI was present. 
 
April 1998 98/137 
A trainee and dive leader completed a dive to 6m for 20 mins. 2 hours later they entered the water again. The 
trainee lost a fin at the surface, but it was replaced. They descended to 7m and, on reaching this depth, the 
trainee did not seem to be in control of herself. The dive leader took hold of the trainee and noticed that her 
eyes were 'going to the back of her head'. The dive leader brought the casualty to the surface using a 
controlled buoyant lift. At the surface she came to. During the debrief the casualty complained of deafness in 
one ear and spoke of ear troubles and an ear operation in the past and stated that she had experienced 
recent 'black outs'. Later blood was seen coming from one of the casualty's ears and she reported to hospital. 
This diver had a diving medical but has now been advised not to dive again. 
 
April 1998 98/138 
Two divers were 5 mins into a dive at a depth of 34m. One of the pair began to feel uncomfortable and out of 
breath. He let his buddy know and they made a controlled ascent. At the surface he had difficulty breathing. 
Once out of the water he recovered. 
 
April 1998 98/352 
Scrambling back onto rocks gave a diver minor cuts to his hands after he was caught in an undertow. 
(Coastguard report) 
 
 
 
Two divers completed a dive to 21m for 30 mins. On arrival at the surface one of the pair felt very cold. His 
hands and feet were numb and he was dizzy and unsteady when he tried to walk. His dive profile did not 
suggest a DCI problem. He was kept warm and given oxygen. He soon recovered. 
 
May 1998 98/142 
After a dive to 16m for 24 mins a 12 year old diver was found to be very cold. He was of small build and had 
been diving in a thin ill-fitting wetsuit with a very large semi-drysuit over the top. The diver was treated for 
hypothermia. 
 
May 1998 98/358 
An emergency ascent after running out of air resulted in a diver losing consciousness. CPR administered until 
helicopter airlifted to Hospital. Dive profile 25m for 27 minutes. (Coastguard report) 
 
May 1998 98/367 
Although this diver was showing signs of DCI i.e.: cold, vomiting, generally unwell and lapsing in and out of 
consciousness the doctor at the recompression facility diagnosed the condition not to be dive related and the 
diver was transferred to hospital. (Coastguard report) 
 
May 1998 98/151 
A diver completed a dive to 36m for 27 mins and 3 hours later a second dive to 21m for 15 mins. At the end of 
the first dive, he spent 15 mins at 6m. Shortly after the second dive he reported feeling unwell, very tired and 
generally uncomfortable. He reported difficulty in breathing during the second dive. The diver was sick and 
very sleepy. Medical advice was sought. The diver was placed on oxygen. He reported that his ears felt as if 
they had not cleared. He was taken to hospital where an ear infection was diagnosed. 
 
May 1998 98/165 
A diver was on a weeklong training course. During the week he had experienced pain in his ear on descent. 
After ascending slightly it had cleared. After one dive he complained of a sharp pain in his left ear and feeling 
giddy and of being subject to 'rocking movements'. A medical examination diagnosed a perforated eardrum, 
subsequent examinations proved inconclusive. He was prescribed antibiotics and referred to his GP. 
 
May 1998 98/211 
A diver rolled into the water from a boat. His buddy then rolled in and landed on top of him. The first diver was 
struck on the head by the pillar valve of the second. The dive continued and afterwards it was discovered that 
the injured diver had a cut to his head. He went to hospital where the wound was stitched. He suffered 
bruising and stiffness to head and neck. 
 
May 1998 98/483 
Lifeboat launched to help diver with illness. (RNLI report)

 
May 1998 98/318 
During an open water training dive to just 3 metres a diver practising clearing the mask panicked and was 
brought ashore by other divers. The diver was taken to the recompression facility as a precaution. 
(Coastguard report) 
 
June 1998 98/375 
Diving whilst feeling unwell led to a diver requiring evacuation by helicopter. This diver had felt unwell for 
three days prior to the first dive to 41m and felt seasick before his second dive to 41m. What happened to 
simply saying 'NO'. (Coastguard report) 
 
June 1998 98/189 
A diver completed a series of six dives in three days. The last two were 38m for 44 mins including 13 mins 
stops and, 2 hours 28 mins later, to 34m for 43 mins with 19 mins of stops. Prior to the three days this diver 
had been suffering a dull ache in his right elbow. After the last dive his elbow was aching more than usual. 
Later this had extended to his right shoulder and to his left shoulder. The strength in his right arm had 
diminished by 50%. After an uncomfortable night the diver sought medical advice. He was examined and 
given recompression treatment. This did not resolve his symptoms so it was concluded that a DCI was not the 
cause. It is believed that the problems were due to carrying heavy diving equipment. 
 
June 1998 98/219 
20 mins after a dive to 28m for 49 mins including 6 mins stop at 5m a diver complained of a pain in the top of 
his left arm. His dive profile was within his computer's recommendations. There were no other signs of DCI 
and it was concluded that he had strained a muscle lifting heavy equipment earlier that day. This diver had 
completed other dives earlier that day. 
 
July 1998 98/252 
Two divers were conducting a dive to 18m, when the mask of one flooded. She indicated that she wished to 
ascend. The ascent was controlled but exceeded the ascent rate of the dive timer of the other diver. The 
following day this diver felt a numbness in his arm and feet, and was generally unwell. He had a history of 
back problems and it was unclear if this was the problem. He sought medical advice and DCI was ruled out. 
 
July 1998 98/209 
An instructor took 2 trainees into the water to dive to a wreck in a depth of 15m. As they descended they let 
go of the shotline. One student descended quickly and the instructor went after him and regained control. He 
then looked back to see the other student with ear clearing problems. He left his SMB reel on the seabed and 
indicated to the first student to stay and went up to help the second. This student was still having problems 
and wanted to ascend. The instructor took him up to 7m and told him to stay whilst he went back for the other 
student. He collected the second student and ascended. On the way he collected the first student, but the 
second separated from them and made his way to the surface. All three were safely recovered into their boat. 
On return to shore one student stated that he had had discomfort with his ear and the other that he had had 
sinus discomfort. Both sought medical advice. 
 
July 1998 98/253 
A charter boat skipper alerted the Coastguard when two divers returned to the boat suffering from nausea and 
shock. They were given oxygen. The boat returned to harbour and the divers decided that they did not need 
further assistance. (Newspaper report only). 
 
July 1998 98/238 
After a shallow dive to 7m a diver felt unwell and was airlifted, along with his buddy, for precautionary 
assessment. (Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/208 
At a branch pool night a party of members and guests were in the pool. One of the guests tried to stand on an 
airbed in a water depth of 1.5m. He started to fall and dived into the water banging his head on the bottom of 
the pool. He was taken to hospital where his skull was X-rayed. He had 8 stitches in a wound to his forehead 
and then released. 
 
July 1998 98/234 
A diver completed a 40 mins dive to 21m, then 30 mins later, a second dive to 20m for 20 mins. Both were 
multi-level dives. At 20m on the second dive he started to feel uncomfortable. He made his way up to 7m 
where he still had problems, particularly with a flooding mask. He was also anxious about his high air 
consumption. He made an uncontrolled ascent from 4m to the surface. 10 mins after surfacing he was sick 
and continued to feel nauseous for 30 mins. He was given oxygen and his condition improved. He was 
monitored for symptoms of DCI but none were found.

 
July 1998 98/270 
A pair of divers was descending a shotline to a wreck at a depth of 47m. At 37m on the descent the current 
swept a Lion's Mane jellyfish into the face of one of the divers. He was badly stung around the face, he 
removed the jellyfish with his bare hands and these were stung too. He let go of the shotline and descended 
to the seabed. His buddy was unable to keep up with him and they became separated. The buddy met 
another pair and ascended with them. The injured diver's eyes were hurting and his vision had become 
impaired. He was able to find the shotline and made an ascent including 3 mins stops at 3m; total dive time 19 
mins. He arrived back at the surface almost at the same time as his buddy, who came to his assistance. He 
was assisted back into the boat. He complained of being hot with a burning sensation on his face and hands. 
He went below to lie down but began shaking and convulsing. Oxygen was administered and advice sought 
by radio. The casualty complained of pain and tingling in his feet. He began to lose consciousness. A nearby 
oilrig rescue vessel offered assistance and the casualty was transferred to it. He was diagnosed as suffering 
from anaphylactic shock. Adrenaline was administered and the casualty was flown to hospital. From there he 
was transferred to a recompression facility for precautionary treatment. This incident took place in the North 
Sea. The casualty is reported to have made a full recovery. 
 
July 1998 98/497 
Lifeboat launched to help diver with illness. (RNLI report) 
 
July 1998 98/276 
A diver used a stride entry to enter the water from a hardboat. He was carrying an SMB and as he jumped in 
the buoyancy of the SMB pulled his right arm back and upwards causing him great pain. He dekitted in the 
water and was assisted back into the boat. The Coastguard was contacted and medical advice given by radio. 
The diver was given painkillers. The other divers were recovered and the boat headed back to harbour. The 
diver was taken to hospital by ambulance where he was treated for a fully dislocated shoulder. 
 
July 1998 98/400 
A diver who became unconscious on the ascent was assisted to the surface then was airlifted to hospital. No 
recompression was required as cause was not dive related. (Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/266 
Five divers were recovering their boat onto a trailer after their dive. One drove the vehicle and the others 
helped with the boat. As the vehicle made its way up the slip four of the divers jumped onto the boat to get a 
lift to the car park. The road made a turn and this tipped the people off of the boat. One landed in a wire mesh 
fence injuring his hand and knee, another sustained injuries to his head and pelvis. This later casualty was 
taken by ambulance to hospital where he received surgical treatment for a possible fractured pelvis. 
 
August 1998 98/226 
Two divers were at 20m and one appeared to have some difficulties then indicated that he was OK. They 
made a normal ascent to the surface. The dive duration was 10 mins. Shortly after the dive, back on shore, 
this diver collapsed. It is thought that he had a heart attack. He was given oxygen, and then taken by 
ambulance to hospital. 
 
August 1998 98/314 
Prior to a series of two dives a diver was putting on a twinset. He was bent over to secure the loosely 
fastened straps when the boat lurched. The set nearly slid over his head but he caught it; both hands were 
raised in an awkward manner. He completed the dives, the first a wreck dive to 47m and the second a drift 
dive to a maximum depth of 20m. Both dives were controlled by the most conservative of the two divers' 
computers. The boat returned to shore and heavy kit was unloaded. 2 hours later, whilst driving home, the 
diver noticed a pain in his right shoulder. He took aspirin that cured the pain. At five o'clock the following 
morning he awoke with a deep pain in this shoulder. He sought medical advice and was advised to report to a 
recompression facility. This he did and he was recompressed. This did not relieve the pain. It was concluded 
that the pain was caused by a strained shoulder joint. A month later the condition had almost completely 
healed. 
 
August 1998 98/310 
A diver carried out a dive to 6m. 2 hours 12 mins later he dived again as part of a threesome. He got ready 
quickly and was hot and breathing heavily by the time he reached the entry point. 10 mins into the dive at a 
depth of 6m this diver experienced a sharp pain in his lower left leg. He signalled to the dive leader and then 
suffered pain of such intensity that he blacked out. The dive leader brought him quickly to the surface and 
towed him to the shore. Once out of the water the pain eased off but he felt exhausted. He recovered but was 
left with sore muscles in his leg and the feeling that he needed to sleep. He reports that he has experienced 
this pain on three previous occasions once in a pool and the other two occasions whilst diving. 
 

August 1998 98/262 
A RHIB was on its way to a dive site in calm conditions. The cox crossed the wake of another boat. One of the 
divers grasped a grab handle to stop herself being thrown forward and injured her wrist. She went to hospital 
and a bone in her wrist was found to be broken. The casualty was in plaster for six weeks. 
 
August 1998 98/263 
On the way to the second dive of the day a diver fell down some stairs of a hardboat and injured his ankle. 
The Coastguard was alerted. The dive plans were aborted and the boat returned to harbour. The boat was 
met by the Coastguard and an ambulance and the casualty taken to hospital. His ankle was found to be 
broken and an operation was required to repair the damage. Sea state had been slight to moderate. 
 
August 1998 98/275 
A group of five divers were on a training course, participating in a night dive. The dive duration was 45 mins to 
a maximum depth of 6m. During the dive the instructor's torch failed and he 'disappeared' twice, leaving one 
of the students to check up on the other divers. Upon surfacing one of the divers collapsed and started 
shaking violently. The casualty was taken to hospital 1 hour 30 mins later. She was given recompression 
treatment and remained in hospital for 5 days. 
 
August 1998 98/285 
Three divers were making stride entries into the water. On entering, one of the three landed on a submerged 
rock spraining her ankle. The dive was aborted. 
 
August 1998 98/286 
After a series of two dives a diver felt sick and dizzy. He was found to have an injury to his ear. He was 
advised to seek medical advice. 
 
August 1998 98/306 
Two divers descended an anchor line to a reef. At the bottom, one of the divers felt that he was not buoyant 
enough and had difficulty breathing. He developed a 'splitting headache' and passed out on the seabed for 
several seconds. He then attracted his buddy's attention. He pointed to his head to indicate the problem. They 
started to swim back to the shotline but this diver passed out again. The buddy brought the casualty to the 
surface with a controlled buoyant lift and then towed him 35m to the boat. The casualty was recovered into 
the boat where he regained consciousness on the way back to the shore. Once ashore the diver was given 
oxygen and a medical check up. He did no further dives that weekend. 
 
September 1998 98/436 
A report of two shore divers in trouble was investigated. The lifeboat revealed that four divers were involved. 
Three had made the shore unaided although one had to given medical treatment and the other who had 
drifted further was picked up by the lifeboat. (Coastguard report) 
 
September 1998 98/278 
After a dive to 24m for 25 mins a diver had very bloodshot eyes. This is believed to have been caused by 
mask squeeze. Two days later his eyes were worse and he subsequently went to hospital. 
 
September 1998 98/442 
A diver ran out of air at 15m and carried out a shared ascent with buddy, however they became tangled in the 
shot line at 3m and fell back to 30m where the two made a rapid direct ascent to the surface. Another of the 
party made a similar ascent (reason unknown) . The diver out of air was unconscious and required 
resuscitation. All three divers were evacuated by helicopter for treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
September 1998 98/305 
On the return trip from a dive a RHIB crossed the wake of a larger vessel. Although the cox had slowed the 
RHIB slammed into this wake and one passenger was thrown onto the metal screen surround and aerial 
bracket of the RHIB. He struck his head and received a bad cut to his left ear. He was taken by ambulance to 
hospital and stitches were required to this wound. 
 
  

NDC Diving Incidents Report 1998 
Boating & Surface Incidents 
October 1997 98/447 
Lifeboat launched to assist swamped dive boat. Craft and crew brought in. (RNLI report) 
 
October 1997 98/448 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
October 1997 98/449 
Two lifeboats assisted in the search for missing diver(s). (RNLI report) 
 
October 1997 98/450 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s). Others coped. (RNLI report) 
 
October 1997 98/451 
Lifeboat launched to assist divers, others coped. (RNLI report) 
 
October 1997 98/452 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
October 1997 98/092 
A dive charter vessel with 14 persons on board hit rocks and sank. A Navy vessel in the area responded to 
the CG relay call and the lifeboat proceeded. 2 persons were picked up from a liferaft, the rest from the water. 
(Coastguard & RNLI report) 
 
October 1997 98/033 
Two pairs of divers entered the water to dive from a RHIB. When the divers were underwater the engine of 
the RHIB stopped and could not be restarted. The boat was anchored and attempts made to repair and restart 
the engine. The divers returned to the boat. The Coastguard was alerted and a police launch towed the boat 
into a harbour. After further cleaning and adjustment to the engine it was restarted. 
 
October 1997 98/453 
Two lifeboats launched to assist dive boat with engine problems and missing diver(s). Three people landed 
and craft escorted in. (RNLI report) 
 
October 1997 98/039 
Whilst returning from a dive, a dive boat's outboard engine broke down. The boat was anchored and the fuel 
and plugs checked. A passing fishing boat then towed the disabled boat back to the harbour. 
 
November 1997 98/328 
Dive boat reported two divers missing. The CG helicopter was tasked and given an area to search, quickly 
locating them and guided their own boat to their position. (Coastguard report) 
 
November 1997 98/010 
A diver was helping to recover a boat onto a trailer when a large wave lifted the boat, knocking him down and 
depositing the boat on top of him. He was released when the boat was again lifted by the water. At the time 
he felt OK, but was subsequently discovered to have two broken ribs. 
 
November 1997 98/089 
A dive boat engine failed to start. The boat was towed ashore by a lifeboat. (Newspaper report only) 
 
Analysis of Boating & Surface Incidents

 
 
 
December 1997 98/457 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
December 1997 98/331 
Two shore divers were caught in a tide race and were unable to re-make the shore. They were assisted by a 
local fishing vessel that took them to the harbour. These divers were not local to the area and obviously did 
not consult anyone about local tidal conditions. (Coastguard & RNLI report) 
 
December 1997 98/458 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
December 1997 98/459 
Lifeboat launched to search for missing divers. Two people landed. (RNLI report) 
 
December 1997 98/460 
Lifeboat recovers an abandoned dive boat. (RNLI report) 
 
December 1997 98/461 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s). Others coped. (RNLI report) 
 
December 1997 98/462 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat in difficulties in adverse conditions, craft escorted in. (RNLI report) 
 
January 1998 98/463 
Lifeboat recovers an abandoned dive boat. (RNLI report) 
 
January 1998 98/332 
Two shore divers experienced difficulty with the tidal current and ended up on a nearby island. They shone 
torches and waved at a passing car ferry that spotted them and reported to the CG. The lifeboat gave them a 
lift back to shore. (Coastguard & RNLI report) 
 
January 1998 98/464 
Two lifeboats assisted in the search for missing diver(s). Others coped. (RNLI report) 
 
February 1998 98/334 
Two divers became separated from their charter vessel and eventually made their way ashore. In the 
meantime the vessel had reported this to the Coastguard and at the same time one of the divers had made 
his way to a nearby house and raised the alarm via the 999 system. Both divers were reunited with the vessel 
with the help of a local fish farm workboat. It is thought no detection aids were carried. (Coastguard report) 
 
March 1998 98/335 
A dive RHIB with four on board reported engine failure. A local vessel responded and the dive boat was towed 
back to the slip. (Coastguard report) 
 
March 1998 98/337 
A dive RHIB with 6 divers aboard reported being broken down and drifting. A lifeboat which was out on 
exercise was diverted and towed the boat into harbour. (Coastguard & RNLI report) 
 
March 1998 98/338 

Diver reported missing by buddy. Had become disorientated in fading light and climbed onto rocks. Lifeboat 
crew and Coastguard rescue team located the diver and assisted to cliff top complete with equipment and 
without injury. Who is the fourth emergency service ?? (Coastguard & RNLI report) 
 
March 1998 98/339 
A warship was the only vessel to hear a MAYDAY call from a dive RHIB who was reporting a missing diver. 
This was reported to the Coastguard who alerted the helo and lifeboat. The diver was located by own RHIB 
prior to units arriving on scene. (Coastguard report) 
 
March 1998 98/466 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
March 1998 98/467 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Others coped. (RNLI report) 
 
March 1998 98/341 
A dive boat with engine failure and 8 persons on board was towed into harbour by another vessel. 
(Coastguard report) 
 
April 1998 98/131 
Four divers were in a RHIB as part of a boat handling course. One of the group made an emergency stop 
and, as soon as the wheel was turned, the entire central console including steering and engine controls, 
electronics, battery, driver's seat and cylinder rack was thrown into the water. All four people were also thrown 
in. No one was injured and they got back into the boat and recovered the console. One of the tubes was 
punctured. They radioed the Coastguard. A passing vessel came to their assistance and they were towed 
ashore. 
 
April 1998 98/468 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with man overboard. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
April 1998 98/344 
Coastguard rescue team and inshore lifeboat tasked to investigate RHIB reported in difficulty by member of 
public. On arrival it was confirmed they were carrying out rescue drills. Classed as false alarm with good 
intent. (Coastguard & RNLI report) 
 
April 1998 98/470 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
April 1998 98/471 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
April 1998 98/472 
Two lifeboats launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Others coped and persons brought in. (RNLI 
report) 
 
April 1998 98/135 
Three divers were on route to a wreck dive 12 miles offshore. They made a fuel tank change and the engine 
failed to restart. They attempted to resolve the problem but could not. Sea conditions were calm. They 
anchored the boat and contacted the Coastguard. They were towed ashore by an inshore lifeboat. They used 
flares to help the lifeboat locate them. One flare failed to ignite. An electrical fault in the engine was eventually 
traced. 
 
April 1998 98/349 
One of four shore divers lost a fin, all four then got caught in a surface current. The lifeboat was stood down 
when the divers made shore unaided. Coastguard team attended. (Coastguard report) 
 
April 1998 98/347 
Seven divers in a swamped 6.5 metre RHIB were escorted into harbour by the lifeboat. They had no VHF but 
called for assistance on a mobile phone. The boat was powered by two 140 HP engines. (Coastguard & RNLI 
report) 
 
April 1998 98/351 
A chartered RHIB with five divers aboard was towed in by another dive boat after the outboard refused to 
start. (Coastguard report) 
 

April 1998 98/350 
The inshore lifeboat towed a RHIB with 7 divers into harbour. They had experienced engine failure.
(Coastguard & RNLI report) 
 
April 1998 98/353 
Coastguard rescue team was called to investigate an empty drifting boat. This turned out to be a dive boat 
with all divers down collecting shellfish. (Coastguard report) 
 
April 1998 98/473 
Two lifeboats launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
April 1998 98/354 
Three divers who were washed off rocks by the heavy swell and were then swept out by the current were 
rescued by the inshore lifeboat. Why were they diving in such conditions ?? (Coastguard report) 
 
April 1998 98/355 
Two helicopters, two lifeboats, a Coastguard rescue team and a fishing vessel were all tasked to search for 
four divers reported missing by their surface cover boat. They were found and recovered by one of the 
lifeboats and the Coastguard helicopter 1 hour 30 mins after they had entered the water. They had drifted for 
5.5 miles. One diver was taken to hospital suffering shock and mild hypothermia. Surface detection aids were 
inadequate considering the strong currents in that area. (Coastguard & RNLI report) 
 
Boating& Surface Incident Report Source Analysis 
 
 
 
May 1998 98/474 
Two lifeboats launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
May 1998 98/476 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
May 1998 98/477 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
May 1998 98/361 
Dive boat with five on board and engine failure was towed in by a local fishing vessel. (Coastguard report) 
 
May 1998 98/478 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
May 1998 98/479 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat that was out of fuel. Others coped. (RNLI report) 
 
May 1998 98/363 
Whilst investigating a report of a lost boat the searching Coastguard boat came across three divers three 
quarters of a mile from shore. They had been caught in the tide and were drifting. The Coastguard boat on 
returning them to shore responded immediately to a Mayday call and no further details could be obtained. 
(Coastguard report) 
 
May 1998 98/167 
A dive boat capsized. Its two crew members were recovered from the sea by another dive boat. A lifeboat 

towed the capsized craft away from rocks. The other dive boat occupants towed the capsized craft ashore 
and helped to recover it. (RNLI & Newspaper report) 
 
May 1998 98/364 
A fishing vessel reported an unmanned boat at a harbour entrance, the harbour patrol boat discovered that it 
had been a dive boat with all divers down. Flying the 'A' flag whilst all divers are down is very poor practice. 
(Coastguard report) 
 
 
 
Three lifeboats assisted in the search for missing diver(s). Others coped. (RNLI report) 
 
May 1998 98/481 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
May 1998 98/158 
A group of divers in a boat were returning from a dive at a speed of about 20kn. The outboard engine started 
to rattle slightly and then slowed to a stop. The engine instantly restarted and they continued for another 5 
mins, when again the engine rattled and stopped. Although it was an oil injected engine, they added oil to the 
fuel and continued at a slower speed. After another 5 mins the engine stopped again. The local harbour 
control was alerted by radio and they continued at very slow speed. At little later the engine seized. The 
harbour control was informed of their situation and position and three MOD police RHIBs can to tow them 
back. The engine is said to have been well maintained. 
 
May 1998 98/482 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
May 1998 98/163 
Two divers were attempting to dive a wreck in 11m of water in a strong tidal race. They were swept away from 
their boat. The Coastguard was contacted and a lifeboat and helicopter launched. The divers were found at 
the surface, fit and well, by the lifeboat, almost 3 miles from their entry point. They were found quickly, at 
about 9pm, because they were using a strobe light. (Coastguard & RNLI report) 
 
May 1998 98/371 
The lifeboat was called to a dive RHIB that had broken down with seven divers on board. They were towed 
back the 8 miles to their point of departure. (Coastguard & RNLI report) 
 
May 1998 98/372 
Reports of divers in trouble were being received via 999. Three divers were pulled from the surf by lifeboat 
crew ashore. (Coastguard report) 
May 1998 98/484 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s). Others coped. (RNLI report) 
 
June 1998 98/485 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat that was out of fuel. Craft brought in. (RNLI report) 
 
June 1998 98/486 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
June 1998 98/487 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft escorted in. (RNLI report) 
 
June 1998 98/488 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
June 1998 98/489 
Lifeboat launched to assist stranded diver(s). Persons brought in. (RNLI report) 
 
June 1998 98/213 
Whilst dropping two divers into the water a RHIB took on a lot of water. The boat was driven to allow the water 
to escape but, in the process, some of the water got into the fuel and the engine cut out. The boat was about 
200m from the buoy marking the dive site. It was anchored and attempts made to restart the engine. The 
anchor started to drag and the engine could not be restarted. The Coastguard was notified and a lifeboat 
launched to assist. The divers surfaced and held onto the buoy. The engine was eventually restarted and the 
divers recovered. No ill effects were reported.

 
June 1998 98/490 
Lifeboats launched to assist swamped dive boat. Others coped. (RNLI report) 
 
June 1998 98/379 
Two divers had dived from an unmanned and unmarked dinghy, which had then drifted onto rocks. Members 
of the public called the Coastguard who upon investigation discovered the divers finning to shore. Lesson 
taught I hope ! (Coastguard report) 
 
June 1998 98/492 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
June 1998 98/382 
Two local vessels assisted a broken down dive boat with seven divers on board. (Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/494 
Two lifeboats launched to assist dive boat with engine problems and missing diver(s). Two people and craft 
brought in. (RNLI report) 
 
July 1998 98/384 
The lifeboat was launched to assist two divers on the surface whose dive boat had drifted due to engine 
failure. The lifeboat picked up the divers (with cramp) and towed the dive boat back into harbour. (Coastguard 
report) 
 
July 1998 98/386 
A dive boat reported that other divers appeared to be in difficulty, they were on a rock in heavy swell and 
could not make it back to their own boat. The reporting boat managed to get a line to the divers and tow them 
to their boat (was it unmanned ?) (Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/385 
Two very lucky shore divers who had drifted to seaward in strong currents were spotted by a lifeboat out on 
exercise. They were taken aboard and examined by a paramedic who diagnosed cold and shock. What 
happened to surface location aids and a shore party ? (Coastguard & RNLI report) 
 
July 1998 98/387 
Dive boat with engine failure and three on board was towed in by the lifeboat. (Coastguard report) 
 
 
 
PAN PAN call from dive boat reporting engine failure and drifting. Lifeboat on scene reported boat was 
swamped and took all eight divers aboard and safely back ashore. (Coastguard report) 
July 1998 98/194 
 
A dive boat had two pairs of divers in the water. One pair surfaced away from the boat and was spotted by 
people on near by cliffs drifting away from their boat. The alarm was raised. Two lifeboats and other nearby 
craft came to assist. The lost divers were recovered after 40 mins, 1.5 miles from their entry point. They were 
reunited with their boat. 
 
July 1998 98/391 
Two rescue teams and a helicopter were called to search for three divers reported missing. They were located 
safe and well some way from their shore entry point. (Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/496 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
July 1998 98/236 
A diver was separated from his party. An air and sea search took place. The diver swam ashore safely. (RNLI 
& Newspaper report) 
 
July 1998 98/495 
Two lifeboats launched to assist swamped dive boat. (RNLI report) 
 
July 1998 98/241 
A dive boat broke down with divers in the water. The cox radioed for assistance. A lifeboat was launched and 
recovered three divers, who were unaware of the problem. (Newspaper report only). 

 
July 1998 98/396 
With four divers down and one drifting away on the surface the dive boat contacted the Coastguard who 
began an immediate search with two lifeboats, a helicopter and other vessels. One of the resources located 
the diver 5 miles from point of entry. The diver was then airlifted to hospital for a check up. (Coastguard & 
RNLI report) 
 
July 1998 98/498 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
July 1998 98/228 
The engine of a dive boat stopped whilst the boat was 2 miles off shore. The engine could not be restarted. 
The Coastguard was alerted and a lifeboat arrived to tow the boat back to the launch site. 
 
July 1998 98/401 
Two lifeboats, a helicopter, six other dive boats and two Coastguard rescue were alerted to a diver who had 
been observed waving a flag and shouting. The dive cover boat had suffered engine problems. (Coastguard 
report) 
 
July 1998 98/220 
Three divers surfaced after a dive. Their RHIB approached to recover them. The cox put the boat into neutral 
as she approached the divers. She moved to help the divers into the boat and in doing so knocked the engine 
into gear. The boat struck one of the divers and the propeller hit him several times. He lost consciousness. He 
was recovered into the boat, taken ashore and then by ambulance to hospital. He suffered concussion, cuts to 
his right ankle, and cuts and bruising to both legs and the left-hand side of his face. His drysuit was also 
damaged beyond repair. 
 
July 1998 98/240 
A diver became separated from the others during a drift dive. His party searched for him for 25 mins and then 
alerted the Coastguard. Three lifeboats and a helicopter were sent to search for the diver. He was eventually 
found 2 miles from the entry point. The diver is believed to have surfaced too quickly. He was taken to a 
recompression facility for treatment. (Newspaper report only). 
 
July 1998 98/402 
A dive boat made a PAN (urgency) broadcast following engine failure and was subsequently towed back to 
harbour by lifeboat. (Coastguard & RNLI report) 
 
August 1998 98/261 
Two divers descended a shotline to a wreck at an expected depth of 17m. On reaching the shot they found it 
1m off the bottom. They searched around for the wreck which they did not find. 20 mins into the dive, with the 
water current slowly increasing they moved out of the shelter of a bay into a strong tidal stream, of near to 3 
kn. They attempted to deploy a delayed SMB but the reel jammed and had to be abandoned. The current 
carried the divers around a large rock, one either side. This caused them to become separated. Both divers 
surfaced safely. They were spotted by people on nearby cliffs who called the emergency services. An inshore 
lifeboat was launched. The divers were spotted and recovered by another boat. They were safely reunited 
with their own group who had by this time started their own search. 
 
August 1998 98/408 
Investigations were carried out following a 999 call reporting two dive boats overdue. Enquiries found that one 
had broken down and was under tow by the other. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/256 
Workmen on shore raised the alarm when they sighted three shore divers being swept out by a current. A 
lifeboat was launched and picked up all three, one of whom had ingested seawater. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/412 
Unmanned boat in a Loch entrance was investigated and found to be a dive boat with diver down. No 'A' flag. 
Very unsafe practise. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/411 
An evening dive was carried out by two divers who became separated on the bottom. Both divers surfaced 
within minutes of each other but the boat sighted only one. The alarm was raised and two lifeboats and a 
helicopter began to search. The missing diver was located by Coastguard and Coastwatch units guiding the 
boat toward the diver using radio. The divers strobe and torch both refused to work. (Coastguard report) 
 

August 1998 98/413 
Whilst on patrol a Coastguard patrol boat came across a dive boat with engine failure. The occupants of the 
boat reported that one diver had become separated from them. The patrol boat located and recovered the 
diver. When questioned about safety equipment the divers admitted to having left SMB, 'A' flag and VHF radio 
in the car ! (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/245 
A number of boats were over a wreck site. A RHIB had put two divers into the water when they were struck by 
a large hardboat. The engine of the RHIB scraped against the hull of the large boat and the two divers had to 
swim out of the way. The crew of the hardboat recovered their shotline and left the scene. No subsequent ill 
effects were noted. 
 
August 1998 98/248 
Two dive boats were at anchor with divers down. A yacht was on a collision course with them. Attempts were 
made to alert the skipper of the yacht but he did not take avoiding action until the last moment and he collided 
with the starboard side of both boats. Minor damage but no injuries resulted. 
 
August 1998 98/499 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems. Craft towed in. (RNLI report) 
 
August 1998 98/418 
Two shore divers became separated, one made the shore unaided and raised the alarm whilst the other clung 
to an off lying rock until the lifeboat arrived. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/419 
Dive boat's engine refused to start after the dive and the boat with ten onboard was towed in by lifeboat. 
(Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/420 
Divers who became separated from the shotline were located by helicopter and the lifeboat re-united them 
with their vessel. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/422 
A dive charter vessel that took out a party of divers from different clubs had dropped two off in one location 
and on the return forgot to pick them up. The lifeboat was alerted and collected two very annoyed divers. 
(Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/297 
Dive boat with engine failure and eight divers on board fired red flares and were towed in by lifeboat. 
(Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/423 
RHIB with engine failure and four on board fired red flares and were towed in by lifeboat. (Coastguard report)
 
August 1998 98/424 
A PAN PAN call was received reporting two divers overdue. A lifeboat, fixed wing aircraft, helicopter and other 
vessels were tasked to search. The divers were located safe and well by the lifeboat. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/427 
An inshore lifeboat whilst out on exercise came across three shore divers who, due to sea and weather 
conditions, were exhausted. The ILB picked up the divers and returned them to shore. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/303 
A search involving a lifeboat was initiated after a diver was reported missing. The diver reached shore 
unaided. (Newspaper report only). 
 
August 1998 98/431 
The inshore lifeboat rescued a diver who was experiencing strong tides. His buddy had made shore unaided 
and raised the alarm. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/500 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat. Problem not recorded. (RNLI report) 
 
August 1998 98/433 
Dive boat with six onboard reported that their propeller had fallen off. A Lifeboat exercising in the area towed 

them in. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/434 
Dive RHIB with engine failure and three onboard was towed in by a dive charter vessel. (Coastguard report) 
 
September 1998 98/437 
A club diver who was collecting shellfish was reported 30 mins overdue. The helicopter was scrambled, 
located the diver and the lifeboat picked him up. The dive boat had no communications. The situation was 
relayed from a nearby dredger. (Coastguard report) 
 
September 1998 98/438 
Dive RHIB with engine failure towed in by lifeboat. (Coastguard report) 
 
September 1998 98/439 
One of the crew of a passenger boat reported to the Coastguard that he had seen a dive boat that appeared 
to be searching for missing divers. Two lifeboats and a helicopter were sent to the scene. One hour later a 
pleasure fishing boat reported having picked up three divers 2 miles from their entry point. Divers should be 
aware of tides and local currents prior to the dive. (Coastguard report) 
 
September 1998 98/324 
Cries for help in thick fog were reported by a member of the public. A call to vessels in the area revealed a 
dive boat had two divers missing for over an hour. Two lifeboats, three Coastguard rescue teams and five 
other vessels began the search. A fishing vessel located them and the lifeboat transported them to the 
ambulance ashore for a check up. (Coastguard report) 
 
September 1998 98/441 
Dive boat with engine failure and three onboard was towed in by local fishing vessel. (Coastguard report) 
 
September 1998 98/444 
A warship responded to a relay call from the Coastguard about a broken down dive boat. The warship took 
the five occupants on board and the lifeboat towed back the RHIB. (Coastguard report) 
 
September 1998 98/445 
An all vessels call by the Coastguard reference a RHIB with engine failure resulted in a dive charter vessel 
responding and assisting the boat with five divers aboard. (Coastguard report) 
 
September 1998 98/446 
Dive boat with five on board suffered engine failure and was towed in by lifeboat. (Coastguard report) 
 
 

NDC Diving Incidents Report 1998 
Ascents 
October 1997 98/042 
Two divers became disorientated underwater at a depth of 22m. They developed buoyancy problems with 
drysuit boots inflated and made a rapid ascent. No subsequent ill effects are reported. 
 
October 1997 98/032 
Two divers were at a depth of 30m when one of them lost a fin. He lost buoyancy control and made a rapid 
ascent to the surface. No ill effects were reported. 
 
October 1997 98/327 
A diver who vomited into his mouthpiece made a rapid ascent from 36m. The diver was then airlifted for 
treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
October 1997 98/045 
At the end of a dive to 32m for 44 mins two divers ascended the anchor line. The anchor line was fastened to 
a weight by a snap shackle with a trip line. During their ascent, the snap shackle became disconnected, 
possibly because it was fouled by a lifting bag, and the boat was blown down wind. As the boat moved down 
wind the divers were dragged through the water and towards the surface. The divers let go of the anchor line 
and returned to 20m where they attempted to launch a delayed SMB. During this time they became 
separated. Both divers then surfaced and were picked up and returned to the hardboat. They undertook re-
entry decompression for 20 mins using nitrox 50. After surfacing they were placed on oxygen and taken to a 
recompression chamber where they were treated for 2 hours 30 mins as a precaution. No subsequent ill 
effects were reported. 
 
November 1997 98/052 
After a dive to 36m for 25 mins a pair of divers were swimming up a slope. At 20m one of the divers lost 
control of his drysuit buoyancy and made a faster than normal ascent to the surface. His dive computer was 
found to be signalling an ascent warning. No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
 
November 1997 98/053 
Early into a dive at a depth of 20m a trainee diver started to panic. She was brought to the surface by her 
instructor. A faster than normal ascent was reported but no subsequent ill effects were observed. 
 
January 1998 98/098 
After a dive to 36m two divers ascended to 22m. One of the divers let air into her drysuit and this caused a 
rapid buoyant ascent. She experienced some shoulder pain but this was a normal condition for this diver. No 
other problems were found. 
 
January 1998 98/101 
19 mins into a dive at a depth of 21m a diver got air in his drysuit boots and lost both fins. In a panic he took in 
water and made a rapid ascent. No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
 
January 1998 98/099 
After a dive to 36m three divers made their way up to 34m. One diver felt that she was unable to fin upwards 
and started to panic. She took in a little water. Her buddies brought her to the surface. They made a very fast 
ascent. No subsequent ill effects. 
 
February 1998 98/111 
Two divers had completed a dive to 36m and were ascending an underwater slope to a depth of 6m where 
they planned 5 mins stops. 38 mins into the dive at 14m one of the divers began to feel buoyant and fully 
opened the dump on his drysuit. Still too light he reached down from a rock but could not lift it and became 
inverted. His buddy tried to right him but in the struggle both had their regulators dislodged and the inverted 
diver's mask was filled with water. Losing contact with each other the buoyant diver made a rapid ascent, 
breathing out all the way. He arrived at the surface, the right way up and shouted for help. A boat came to his 
assistance. The other diver completed the planned stops. No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
 
February 1998 98/102 
After a dive to 36m two divers followed a slope up to 14m. 39 mins into the dive, one of the divers had 
difficulty venting air from the auto dump on his drysuit and became inverted. His buddy tried to right him but 
was unable to do so. The inverted diver made a rapid ascent to the surface. In the struggle he had his mask 

NDC Diving Incidents Report 1998 
Technique 
October 1997 98/047 
After conducting air sharing and controlled buoyant lift practice from a depth of 10m a diver joined three 
others for a dive to 20m. At this depth one of the other divers was preparing to conduct a controlled buoyant 
lift when the first diver ran out of air. He panicked and made a fast ascent to the surface. Subsequently it was 
discovered that this diver's BC emergency cylinder was seized shut, and that in addition to his 7½ kg weight 
belt he had 3½ kg of rocks in his BC pocket. 
 
November 1997 98/051 
Three divers were diving in a quarry to a depth of 24m. After 20 mins they moved into an area of low visibility. 
The dive leader became separated. All divers ascended and regrouped. They decided to continue the dive 
with a maximum depth of 10m. 
 
November 1997 98/060 
A dive leader was with a trainee who was conducting her first dive of the day in a quarry. At a depth of 6m the 
trainee lost control of her buoyancy and made a fast ascent to the surface. The dive leader was not 
immediately aware of the separation. When she was she retraced her steps to locate the trainee. After a 
'minute or so' she also surfaced and was unable to see the trainee, who was already making an exit from the 
water, because of the presence of many other divers. Both divers alerted others to their lost buddy and some 
confusion arose until it was discovered that both were safe. 
 
December 1997 98/079 
A diver was at 20m trying out a new drysuit. He lost control of his buoyancy and made a fast ascent to the 
surface. No subsequent ill effects were noted. 1 hour 10 mins earlier this diver had conducted a 30 mins dive 
to a maximum depth of 7m. 
 
January 1998 98/109 
Three divers prepared for a dive to 18m in a quarry. The dive leader noticed that one of the other divers had a 
poorly adjusted mask and took steps to resolve the problem. During the descent this diver continued to have 
problems with the mask, but returned OK signals. 22 mins into the dive this diver gave an unsure response to 
an OK signal from the dive leader. The dive leader indicated an ascent, but the third diver had swum on a 
little. The troubled diver waited whilst the dive leader caught and brought back the third diver. They started 
their ascent. The troubled diver was over weighed and, at 10m, she started to sink back. The dive leader took 
hold of her hand and they started to re-ascend. Once again at 10m the troubled diver seemed to have 
regained control and was released. At this point she made a rapid ascent to the surface with the others 
following. At the surface this diver was sick. She was towed to the side of the quarry by her buddies and 
helped onto a rock. Unable to exit at this point they shouted for help. At first no notice was taken of this (it was 
assumed to be a practice), but then a boat was brought to assist. The casualty was passing in an out of 
consciousness. Taken ashore she was placed on oxygen and moved by ambulance to hospital. The casualty 
was reported to be recovering. 
 
March 1998 98/108 
Two divers using rebreathers entered the water to start their dive. One had a buoyancy problem and was 
preparing to leave the water to resolve the problem. The other diver was conducting buoyancy checks at 2m, 
he looked up and felt 'strange'. He surfaced and signalled to his buddy that he was making for the exit point. 
Without warning this diver became unconscious and started to sink down an underwater cliff face. He was 
spotted by two other divers who were just preparing to submerge. They chased after him and caught him at 
15m on a rock ledge. They tried to give him his normal alternative air supply but he was not breathing. Using 
his suit buoyancy they brought him to the surface and summonsed help. The casualty started breathing and 
regained consciousness. He was given oxygen and taken to hospital. He was found to have a burst lung but 
is reported to be making a recovery. An equipment check after the incident found the diluent air supply turned 
off and the oxygen supply only just turned on. 
 
April 1998 98/152 
After a dive to 41m for 15 mins a diver prepared to ascend from a wreck. He deployed a delayed SMB, 
inflating it with his pony regulator. After the SMB reached the surface the diver noticed his main regulator 
'became light' and he was unable to get air from his main cylinder. He reached for his pony regulator but could 
not find it because he had not replaced it in its clip. Whilst this was happening he had sunk to the seabed at a 
depth of 50m. He could not inflate his suit and made a free ascent to the surface, missing 10 mins of stops. 
Back in the boat he was given oxygen. His buddy surfaced 9 mins later having completed decompression 

stops. Neither diver experienced subsequent ill effects. 
 
May 1998 98/188 
Three divers entered the water to conduct a dive to 32m. On entry one of the group lost his mask and was 
forced to abandon the dive. The others continued. At the end of the dive they could not find the shotline and 
could not launch a delayed SMB because the third diver had been carrying it. They therefore made an ascent 
with no datum. They decompressed for 2 mins at 6m and then surfaced. They neither saw nor heard their 
boat (the only one on the wreck) but came up underneath it. One was hit by the side of the boat, the other by 
the propeller. The propeller cut through the BC and the regulator hose of this diver. Loosing buoyancy this 
diver dropped her weightbelt, surfaced and was recovered into the boat. She was taken to hospital suffering 
from shock but without other injury. 
 
May 1998 98/289 
Two divers completed a dive to 39m. At the end of the dive they were decompressing under a drifting SMB 
when one of the pair ran out of air. He ascended to the surface missing 3 mins of stops. He suffered no ill 
effects. He had not communicated the problem with his buddy and did not attempt to use his buddy's 
alternative air source. 
 
May 1998 98/156 
15 mins into a dive at a depth of 20m a diver's foot came out of her drysuit boot. Whilst trying to resolve the 
situation the other foot also came out of its boot. She lost control of her buoyancy and rose to the surface. Her 
buddy had cut hands through trying to hold on to rocks underwater to steady them both. No other ill effects 
were reported. 
 
May 1998 98/370 
When a shot line disappeared one of three divers carried out a brief search and could not see the other two 
and then surfaced to raise the alarm. Two lifeboats and the Coastguard helicopter were tasked but re-called 
when the other two divers surfaced without incident. Classed as false alarm with good intent. (Coastguard 
report) 
 
May 1998 98/206 
Two divers were on a wreck at a depth of 36m. 21 mins into the dive both divers sent lifting bags to the 
surface. One of the divers used his octopus regulator to inflate the bag and the regulator started to free flow. 
With a 6 mins ascent indicated they started to ascend. The free flow got worse and the cylinder quickly 
emptied. This diver switched to his pony regulator, but it was found to be empty. He attempted to use his 
buddy's octopus regulator and this proved difficult to release. They were close to the surface and decided to 
surface missing stops. They were recovered into their boat and placed on oxygen. The Coastguard was 
alerted and a helicopter flew both to a recompression facility for treatment. A lifeboat was also summonsed as 
they had other divers in the water conducting long decompression stops, this however was called off after 
other dive boats came to assist. Neither diver experienced any symptoms. 
 
June 1998 98/316 
Two divers descended to 17m, the descent was fast, the visibility was poor and one of the pair felt exhausted 
and had difficulty in breathing. She indicated that she wanted to ascend. Her breathing became more difficult 
and she started to panic. Her buddy commenced a controlled buoyant lift. During the lift the panicked diver 
spat out her regulator and pulled her mask off. Once at the surface she was towed ashore by her buddy and 
given oxygen. She was taken by ambulance to hospital. She was given a chest X-ray but no problems were 
found and she was later released. This diver had been using a borrowed weightbelt with extra weight. 
 
July 1998 98/216 
An instructor and a group of trainees were descending for a dive. One of the trainees had buoyancy problems 
and the instructor had to retrieve him and regroup. The trainee again began to descend quickly and his weight 
belt slipped to around his ankles. The instructor managed to bring the group to the surface in a controlled 
manner. Afterwards the instructor was concerned about her 'saw tooth' dive profile. No ill effects were 
reported. 
 
July 1998 98/235 
Two divers ran out of air. (Verbal report from RNLI only) 
 
July 1998 98/212 
Two divers descended a shotline to a wreck at a depth of 33m. The shot was not on the wreck and they 
deployed a delayed SMB and started to search for the wreck. The SMB line began to drag, and they later 
discovered that another boat had attached a 'floating decompression cylinder' to their line. They swam back 
reeling in the line. After 21 mins both divers were at 80 bar. They ascended to 6m and arrived there after 25 
mins. They carried out a 1 min stop. The computer of one of the pair indicated the need for 4 mins stops at 

3m. They completed 2 mins at 3m but surfaced because they were low on air. Their total time was 33 mins. 
The computer displayed missed stops and the divers were placed on oxygen for 20 mins. No ill effects were 
experienced by either diver. 
 
August 1998 98/407 
Two divers who dropped into the water from a RHIB discovered they had insufficient weight to submerge. In 
the meantime the boat had gone to another site to drop off more divers. The two on the surface were picked 
up by a passing fishing vessel !! (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/283 
Four divers conducted a dive to 35m. Underwater one of them became separated from the others. This diver 
made his own way back and went off to a car park. His buddies surfaced after 22 mins and raised the alarm, 
believing him to be missing underwater. As a search was being organised the missing diver returned. 
 
August 1998 98/272 
Two divers started their ascent from a wreck at a depth of 30m when one of them was down to 80 bar. By 
20m all of this air had been used and she started to use her buddy's alternative air source. The buddy's air 
supply was now at 50 bar. They were spotted by two other divers above them and one of these divers came 
back to assist. He offered his octopus regulator to the out of air diver and started to lift this diver with a 
controlled buoyant lift using his own BC. Just as they started the ascent the shotline was hauled up fast. They 
released the shotline and ascended, with a brief stop at 6m. All four regrouped at the surface and were safely 
recovered into their boat. No ill effects were experienced. 
 
September 1998 98/287 
Two divers had been to 22m and, when at 18m, one of the two ran out of air. Her buddy gave her his 
alternative air source and they made a rapid ascent to the surface. Once out of the water the diver who had 
run out of air was found to be suffering from shock and was given oxygen. 
 
September 1998 98/307 
Two divers conducted a wreck dive at a depth of 25m. Towards the end of the dive one of the pair captured a 
lobster which he held in his hand. With 100 bar each left in their cylinders they started their ascent. At 6m they 
both stop for a planned 3 mins stop, only 1 min being required by the 88 tables. After 1 min 30 secs the diver 
with the lobster ran out of air. He grabbed his buddy's octopus regulator and despite inhaling some water to 
start with manages to get air. During this they sank back down to 13m. The buddy then used the buoyancy of 
his own jacket to bring them both to the surface. At the surface help was summonsed and the diver taken in 
tow and brought to the boat. Once back in the boat both divers are found to be without symptoms. The lobster 
made good its escape! 
 
 

displaced and lost his mouthpiece but was able to use another of his regulators. The buddy made a normal 
ascent, completing decompression stops. The buoyant diver had a slight headache but no other ill effects 
were reported. 
 
February 1998 98/110 
Two divers started their descent. At 13m the regulator of one started to free flow and, not realising what was 
happening, he continued to descend. At 20m it was fully free flowing. This diver then made a fast ascent to 
the surface. After an initial check up this diver left the site without further contact (contrary to advice given at 
the time). 
 
February 1998 98/115 
A trainee and an instructor were 5 mins into a dive at a depth of 20m. The trainee was using a borrowed 
drysuit and BC. The drysuit was too large for the trainee. The trainee lost control of her buoyancy, was unable 
to dump air from suit or BCD and made a rapid, feet first, ascent. The drysuit boots were forced off of her feet. 
No subsequent ill effects were noted. 
 
March 1998 98/116 
Two divers were descending a shotline to a wreck at 28m. At 21m they exchanged OK signals. One diver 
then let air into her drysuit. The valve 'froze' open and the suit filled with air. The diver was holding on to the 
shotline in an inverted position. It was impossible for her to right herself so she released the line and made a 
rapid ascent, breathing out all the way. At the surface she was recovered into a boat and given oxygen for 1 
hour. No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
 
March 1998 98/336 
Precautionary recompression treatment was given to a diver who had made a rapid ascent from 7m but had 
made a stop at 3 metres. Symptoms were dizziness and nausea. This was an airlift evacuation. (Coastguard 
report) 
 
March 1998 98/128 
Two divers were 20 mins into a dive at a depth of 20m. One of the pair was unable to control his buoyancy 
and made a rapid ascent to the surface. Subsequently it was found that the BCD inflator hose was incorrect 
for the jacket and the inflation unit was loose. No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
 
March 1998 98/121 
Two divers had dived to a maximum of 20m. They were 27 mins into a dive at a depth of 15m. One of the 
divers was using a weight harness system and one of the two weights was accidentally released. The diver 
was unable to prevent an uncontrolled buoyant ascent to the surface. She breathed out during the ascent and 
suffered no subsequent ill effects. The buddy followed at a normal rate. It is thought that the weight release 
became snagged thus releasing the weight. 
 
March 1998 98/122 
A trainee diver and an instructor commenced a dive to 10m. The trainee experienced some difficulty 
descending. 10 mins into the dive, the dive leader demonstrated the use of an SMB. The trainee felt 
something was wrong with his fin and bent down to correct it. This caused him to make a rapid feet first 
ascent to the surface. The instructor was not able to prevent this. At the surface the diver was recovered into 
a boat and placed on oxygen. Once ashore recompression advice was sought. The diver remained on oxygen 
for 1 hour 33 mins and no symptoms were noted. No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
 
March 1998 98/129 
Two divers completed a dive to 6m for 20 mins. Later that day they made a second dive to 21m. 19 mins into 
that dive at a depth of 7m one of the divers lost control of his buoyancy and made a rapid ascent to the 
surface. The diver's right hand was slightly swollen, this was believed to be because of a tight cuff seal and 
cold water. This diver was using a new drysuit. No subsequent ill effects were noted. 
 
March 1998 98/148 
Two divers completed a dive to 34m with a duration of 24 mins. One of the pair launched a delayed SMB and 
the other went rapidly up the line, possibly missing stops. The first diver completed 4 mins stops at 6m. The 
diver who had missed stops was placed on oxygen once back in the boat. No symptoms materialised. The 
following day she was advised to seek medical advice, but no follow up action was recommended. Two weeks 
later she experienced pain in her spine and shoulder and visited a recompression facility. She was advised 
that this was unlikely to be a DCI. A drysuit dump valve fault may have been the cause of the fast ascent. 
 
March 1998 98/126 
18 mins into a dive, at a depth of 21m, a diver's weightbelt slipped off. He made a rapid ascent to the surface. 
No subsequent ill effects are reported. 

 
March 1998 98/130 
Two divers were 15 mins into a dive at 10m. One of the divers lost control of his buoyancy and made a rapid 
feet first ascent to the surface. He normally used ankle weights but had forgotten to bring them and dived 
without. No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
 
  
March 1998 98/127 
A diver completed a dive to 20m for 40 mins with 1 min decompression stop at 6m. Later that day a dive to 
18m was undertaken. After 40 mins this diver ascended and was unable to release air from the cuff dump of 
his drysuit. He made a rapid ascent to the surface. His computer indicated an alarm. No subsequent ill effects 
were experienced. 
 
April 1998 98/346 
A diver belonging to the party from which the diver of incident 121307 was involved in carried out a dive later 
in the day and made a rapid ascent. Standard treatment was given. (Coastguard report) 
 
May 1998 98/149 
24 mins into a dive and at a depth of 20m a diver let air into his drysuit. He lost control of his buoyancy and 
made a fast ascent to the surface. He tried to release air from the auto dump but it did not let air out fast 
enough. He was recovered into the boat and placed on oxygen. No symptoms appeared. His buddy made a 
normal ascent. 
 
May 1998 98/179 
A pair of divers dived on a wreck to a maximum depth of 28m. As the last pair down they placed a lifting bag 
on the anchor and sent it to the surface. At the end of the dive they prepared a delayed SMB. At first the SMB 
line snagged but then became free. They started their ascent 26 mins into the dive. As they left the wreck they 
were affected by a water current. The diver with the SMB was slowed by the drag of the line and they became 
separated. The other diver's computer indicated that stops were needed. He had difficulty releasing air from 
his drysuit cuff dump and made a rapid buoyant ascent to the surface. He was recovered into the boat and 
placed on oxygen. After several minutes he had no symptoms and transferred to nitrox 40 from his pony 
cylinder. The buddy was safely recovered into the boat. During the return journey the diver who had made the 
rapid ascent felt muscular pain in his left arm and transferred back to oxygen. On arrival back at the harbour 
he felt symptom free. No further action is reported. 
 
May 1998 98/193 
Three divers were conducting a drift dive. The maximum depth reached was 18m. At 12m one of the divers 
became inverted, a possible dump valve malfunction was reported. Her fins came loose and the other divers 
were unable to right her. She made a rapid buoyant ascent to the surface. The others followed, making a 
safety stop on the way. The inverted diver was recovered into the boat. Attempts were made to administer 
oxygen but the cylinder was found to be empty; the gas had leaked out in transit. The Coastguard was 
informed and the diver and one buddy were taken to a recompression facility. No symptoms were found and 
no treatment given. 
 
May 1998 98/214 
Three divers descended a shotline to a wreck at a depth of 47m. At the bottom they had to swim against a 
current about 8m to the wreck. During the swim one diver became separated from the other two. At the wreck 
one of the pair saw the torch light of the third and moved towards him. The other diver of the pair was having 
problems with his regulator and did not follow. He also had a problem with his drysuit inflation. After 2 mins he 
was still on his own and decided to deploy his delayed SMB. During deployment the line became stuck on two 
occasions and he was pulled upwards. At 30m he was still having problems with his regulator and pony 
regulator and he made a fast buoyant ascent to the surface without stops. Once back in the boat he was 
given oxygen for 1 hour. He showed no symptoms. The other two surfaced normally conducting stops on the 
way. The buoyant diver later stated that his regulator had not been serviced for a couple of years. 
 
June 1998 98/258 
Two divers conducted a dive to 45m, one was using a video camera. The shot was not on the wreck and they 
decided to abandon the dive after 18 mins. They deployed a delayed SMB. They attempted to make a stop at 
9m but the diver with the camera struggled to maintain depth. After 1 min they moved up to the next stop, but 
despite dumping air, the buoyant diver ascended to the surface. The other diver completed a 3 mins stop at 
6m. The buoyant diver was recovered from the wate 
r and placed on oxygen. No symptoms of DCI became evident. 
June 1998 98/172 
A group of one instructor and six divers entered the water to perform some training drills. During a mask 
clearing drill one of the divers became separated from the rest of the group and sank from a depth of 6m to 

12m. She panicked and used her BCD to make a buoyant ascent. Other divers towed her to the shore and 
administered oxygen. Her own party was back on shore 8 mins later. The casualty is reported to have 
recovered. 
 
June 1998 98/190 
Two divers entered the water for the second dive of the day. The first had been to 33m for 24 mins without 
stops. The second was 3 hours later to a depth of 24m. This was a drift dive, a new experience for one of the 
pair. This diver was using another diver's drysuit, which was a little too big, and with an unfamiliar cuff dump. 
This diver had difficulty descending and sorting out her buoyancy. During the dive she had problems using the 
cuff dump and air migrated into the legs of the suit. She lost control of her buoyancy and made a rapid ascent 
from 20m to the surface. Her buddy followed. At the surface she was recovered into the boat. She 
experienced a sore ear for about 5 hours following this event. No other ill effects were noted. 
 
June 1998 98/217 
Four divers had been to 22m and followed the bottom up to 20m. One of the group began to loose control of 
his buoyancy. The dive leader held on to this diver's gauges but was pushed away. The diver began to 
ascend, another of the group tried to arrest the ascent but could not. The buoyant diver rose rapidly to the 
surface. The others surfaced at a normal rate. They regrouped at the surface and all made their way out of 
the water. No ill effects were experienced. 
 
June 1998 98/377 
Losing his weightbelt at 34m and the following rapid ascent caused a diver to become unconscious at the 
surface where he was successfully resuscitated and flown for treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/230 
A diver was using a new drysuit for the first time in the sea. She dived to 35m and during the ascent, at 12m, 
she lost control of her buoyancy. She had been using both suit and BC for buoyancy control. She made a 
buoyant ascent to the surface missing a stop. The dive duration was 20 mins. The buddy followed up at the 
correct rate but also missed the stop. Both were monitored for DCI but no signs were seen. 
 
July 1998 98/390 
Medical advice was sought after three divers reported problems with SMB at 14m after a dive to 27m, 
surfacing quickly from 14m. Divers self-monitored situation and told to call Coastguard if symptoms showed. 
(Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/392 
A diver who made a rapid ascent was taken to the recompression facility as a precaution but was not in need 
of treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/393 
Another rapid ascent - The lifeboat transferred the unconscious diver to shore and the recompression facility. 
The Coastguard later received a call requesting a helicopter to transfer the patient to Aberdeen due to the 
seriousness of the situation. Dive profile - rapid ascent from 44m after dropping weightbelt. (Coastguard & 
RNLI report) 
 
July 1998 98/225 
Two divers had been to 36m and were making their way back up following the ground contour. At 20m air 
migrated into the legs of the drysuit of one of the pair and her feet came out of her boots. She made an 
uncontrolled ascent to the surface. No ill effects were noted. 
 
July 1998 98/227 
15 mins into a dive, at a depth of 6m, one of a pair of divers lost a fin. In trying to stop it floating away he lost 
control of his buoyancy and rose to the surface. He called for assistance. No subsequent ill effects were 
reported. 
 
August 1998 98/404 
Three divers were all transported to hospital via lifeboat and ambulance after missing decompression stops. 
No treatment was required. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/410 
Although no symptoms of DCI were present a diver was taken to hospital after a rapid ascent from 27m. After 
a check up the diver was released without further treatment. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/282 
Three divers had been to 35m. They were making their way back up and had got to 20m when one of them 

started to sink back down, he felt that he could not get air into his BC. One of his buddies realised that there 
was a problem and used his own BC to bring them both to the surface. They made a rapid ascent but 
experienced no resultant problems. Dive duration was 16 mins. The BC was subsequently found to be 
working correctly. 
 
August 1998 98/281 
Two divers had been to 36m. As they were making their way back up, one of them started to sink back. He 
thought that he had a problem with his BC inflator. He became separated from his buddy and made a fast 
ascent. His buddy surfaced 5 mins later. It is thought that the diver had become disorientated by silt that they 
had disturbed. Dive duration was 14 mins. No ill effects are reported. 
 
August 1998 98/284 
Two divers started an ascent from 20m, one of them had only 50 bar remaining. At 10m this diver started to 
sink back down again and appeared to be out of air. His buddy offered his alternative air source and they 
made a fairly rapid ascent to the surface. Dive duration was 20 mins. No subsequent ill effects are reported. 
 
August 1998 98/425 
Upon medical advice a diver who had missed a stop was treated locally. (Coastguard report) 
 
August 1998 98/280 
A diver was using a drysuit for the first time. The suit was borrowed and too big. She started the dive holding 
hands with her buddy. Gaining in confidence, at 20m, she let go of her buddy. She then lost control of her 
buoyancy and made a fast ascent to the surface. No subsequent ill effects are reported. 
 
August 1998 98/432 
A report was received of three divers having made a rapid ascent from 25m and although no symptoms were 
apparent, medical advice was obtained and no treatment was required. (Coastguard report) 
 
September 1998 98/279 
A trainee and instructor conducted a dive to 30m for 15 mins. The student was wearing a drysuit belonging to 
the dive school. The suit was not allowing her much movement. As they approached 8m on the ascent the 
student lost control of her buoyancy and she made a rapid ascent to the surface. On the surface the student 
was shaken and panicked. She was given oxygen. No subsequent ill effects are reported. 
 
September 1998 98/443 
Medical advice was passed via a doctor to a dive boat with a diver aboard who had missed 14 mins of stops. 
(Coastguard report) 
 

NDC Diving Incidents Report 1989 
Equipment 
October 1988 98/013 
At the end of a training dive, at a depth of 6m, a trainee's regulator started to free flow. The instructor passed 
the trainee his octopus regulator and brought the trainee to the surface using a controlled buoyant lift. The 
regulator continued to free flow. 
 
November 1988 98/039 
6 mins into a dive, at a depth of 15m, a diver found herself starting to rise to the surface. She was unable to 
control her buoyancy and rose rapidly to the surface. The inflation valve of her drysuit was subsequently 
found to have stuck in, allowing air to flow continuously into the suit. No subsequent ill effects were reported. 
 
November 1988 98/050 
Two divers descended a shotline to the seabed at a depth of 31m. Underwater visibility was very low. At the 
bottom, the regulator of one of the divers let in seawater, which caused him to panic. He was connected to his 
buddy by a line and the buddy also had an SMB. The panicked diver made for the surface dragging the other 
with him. The buddy caught up and managed to control the panicking diver at 23m. They made a controlled 
ascent to 6m and conducted a 3 mins stop. No subsequent ill effects were reported. 
 
November 1988 98/052 
Four pairs of divers descended a shotline to a depth of 40m in a quarry. One pair became temporarily 
separated during the descent due to one stopping to adjust his weightbelt. The buddy of this diver suffered a 
regulator free flow as soon as he arrived at the bottom. One of the other divers gave him his alternative air 
source and a controlled ascent was made. The divers conducted 4 mins of stops. No subsequent ill effects 
were experienced. 
 
December 1988 98/060 
Two divers involved in pool training noticed a smell similar to cellulose paint thinners in their diving air. Other 
cylinders were found to be similarly contaminated. The air was released and the cylinders refilled. During this 
process the refilling air bank also became contaminated. Refilling all associated cylinders reduced the 
problem, but a taint was still present. 
 
December 1988 98/061 
16 mins into a night dive, at a depth of 23m a diver entered an underwater structure in a quarry. The BCD 
direct feed hose of this diver became snagged on a hook inside this structure and she was unable to exit. Her 
buddy entered and was able to free her. The divers made a safe return to the surface. 
 
March 1989 98/101 
A diver was testing a new equipment configuration in shallow water. Prior to the dive, during a kit check, the 
feed supply to his BCD was inadvertently turned off. Underwater he had a problem with a full face mask, and 
was just able to get his alternative air source into his mouth before losing consciousness. He had been unable 
to make himself buoyant. He was recovered to the surface by his buddy and another diver and made a full 
recovery. 
 
March 1989 98/092 
Two divers were filling a lifting bag to raise a shot weight. One diver used the octopus regulator of the other. 
On completion the diver was replacing her octopus regulator into its clip when she accidentally pressed the 
purge and started a free flow. This could not be stopped and, breathing from the octopus regulator of her 
buddy, they made a safe controlled ascent. No subsequent ill effects were reported. 
 
March 1989 98/103 
10 mins into a dive to 36m a diver's cylinder became loose. Her buddy tried to fix the problem but couldn't, so 
they decided to ascend. At this point the buddy's regulator started to free flow. They used the first diver's 
alternative air source and made a faster than normal ascent to the surface. No subsequent ill effects were 
reported. 
 
March 1989 98/108 
A diver was on a training course at a depth of 20m. 10 mins into the dive his regulator started to free flow. 
Another diver provided an alternative air source. The first diver was still in difficulties and the instructor took 
control of the ascent. At the surface the diver was found to be in shock and distressed. He was given a 
medical check and found to have low blood pressure and an irregular heart beat (a known prior condition). He 

was taken to hospital but discharged the same day after a period of observation. 
 
April 1989 98/114 
Three divers were conducting a dive to 35m. 14 mins into the dive they commenced a slow ascent. At this 
point the regulator of one began a slow free flow. This diver switched to his octopus regulator. One of his 
buddies took hold of this diver and they started to ascend. The regulator was now fully free flowing. During the 
ascent the first diver's main cylinder became fully depleted and he switched to his pony cylinder. At 12m they 
got a fast ascent warning from one of their computers and they both dumped air. They lost too much 
buoyancy and returned to 20m before they realised. The buddy inflated his BCD but the other diver was 
unable to do so because he had no air remaining in his main cylinder. The buddy fully inflated his BCD and 
struggled to hold on to the heavy diver. Slowly they ascended again and reached the surface. The third diver 
stayed with the other two throughout. No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
 
May 1989 98/189 
At a depth of 36m a diver switched to his pony cylinder regulator and used his main regulator to blow some air 
into a pipe found on the bottom. When he released the purge button the regulator continued to free flow. He 
and his buddy made a safe ascent to the surface. 
 
May 1989 98/156 
Two divers were at a depth of 25m when the regulator of one of the pair began to free flow. The octopus 
regulator of the other diver was then used but this also started to free flow. The divers ascended to the 
surface. The final part of the ascent was quick. No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
 
May 1989 98/158 
Three divers were at a depth of 34m when, after 10 mins, one of their regulators began to free flow. This diver 
used the alternative air source of one of the others and they made their ascent. The ascent became fast from 
20m and they missed a planned safety stop. No subsequent ill effects were reported. 
 
May 1989 98/163 
Two divers were 10 mins into a dive at a depth of 22m. One of the pair noticed a restriction to inhalation 
through his regulator. The next breath was even more restricted and on the third he was not able to get any 
air. He approached his buddy and they made an air shared ascent. Inspection at the surface showed that his 
air cylinder still contained 160 bar. When tested the regulator fluctuated between no air and free flow. 
 
June 1989 98/231 
Two pairs of divers were conducting a dive, each covered by a boat. Both pairs were using SMBs. One SMB 
moved away from the intended dive area and one of the boats followed it. The first boat stayed in the dive 
area and was recovering the first pair when they heard shouts nearby. They discovered that it was the second 
pair of divers. All divers were safely recovered, and it was found that the SMB of the second pair had become 
detached from the line because of an eyelet failure. The second boat had been following the drifting SMB, not 
realising that it had become detached. 
 
July 1989 98/209 
At the beginning of a dive, at a depth of 6m, a diver's regulator hose burst at the junction with the first stage. 
He made a rapid, controlled ascent to the surface, breathing from this regulator. No ill effects were reported. 
 
July 1989 98/179 
Two divers conducted a dive to 11m. A few minutes into the dive, one of the pair looked at his contents gauge 
which was mounted in a console and noticed that the high pressure hose was kinked at a right angle. As he 
moved the hose it suddenly burst allowing air to escape violently. The two started an ascent and half way to 
the surface he took the alternative air source from his buddy as his own regulator was becoming hard to 
breathe from. They arrived safely at the surface, with a total dive time of 5 mins. The 10.4l cylinder had 
started at 215 bar and finished with 50 bar. 
 
July 1989 98/180 
An instructor and two trainees were descending a shotline to a wreck. At 4m they stopped while one of the 
trainees cleared his ears. At this point the weightbelt fell away from this diver. The instructor grabbed hold of 
the trainee and held him to the shotline. They then made a controlled ascent to the surface. The weightbelt 
was subsequently recovered and it was found that the belt had come undone from the buckle, the buckle was 
still correctly fastened to the clip at the other end of the belt. 
 
August 1989 98/357 
A solo shore diver panicked and made a rapid ascent when his suit became very uncomfortable. He was 
assisted to the shore by another group of divers. An ambulance was called, but the symptoms disappeared 
when the ill fitting drysuit was removed. It beggars belief! (Coastguard report).

NDC Diving Incidents Report 1998 
Miscellaneous 
November 1997 98/329 
Cellular 999 call reporting shore divers in trouble was investigated but the divers were back on shore after 
another vessel had assisted them. (Coastguard report) 
 
February 1998 98/465 
Lifeboat launched to locate missing diver(s). False alarm. (RNLI report) 
 
April 1998 98/469 
Lifeboat launched to locate missing diver(s). False alarm. (RNLI report) 
 
April 1998 98/348 
Once again the Coastguard and lifeboat were called to investigate reports of divers in distress. They were 
actually carrying out rescue drills. The Coastguard service relies heavily on reports of distress or urgency by 
members of the public and whilst I realise the importance of diver rescue training please be aware that the 
waving of flags or arms will be seen as a distress signal. Always inform the Coastguard of your intentions. 
(Coastguard report) 
 
April 1998 98/139 
Two divers completed a dive to 6m for 22 mins. 1 hour 5 mins later they dived again to 6m for 15 mins. After 
the first dive one of them was very cold, he was tense and had difficulty breathing. After the second dive he 
felt dizzy, nearly fainted and had 'pins and needles' in his hands. Medical advice was sought. He was given 
oxygen, kept warm and placed under observation for 1 hour. It was discovered that he had had little sleep the 
previous night and that his drysuit wrist seals were very tight. 
 
April 1998 98/140 
At a depth of 18m a diver started to panic having lost control of his breathing. He started coughing 
underwater. The dive leader brought him to the surface. No subsequent ill effects were noted. 
 
May 1998 98/475 
Lifeboat launched to locate missing diver(s). False alarm. (RNLI report) 
 
May 1998 98/373 
The skipper of a dive charter boat alerted the coastguard when he saw that a diver's SMB had disappeared 
and he was 5 minutes overdue. The Coastguard helicopter was scrambled and the lifeboat launched but both 
were returned before arriving on scene as the diver surfaced shortly afterwards. The action of the skipper was 
a wise precautionary measure and reflects concern for his party. (Coastguard report) 
 
June 1998 98/491 
Two lifeboats launched to locate missing diver(s). False alarm. (RNLI report) 
 
June 1998 98/493 
Lifeboat launched to locate missing diver(s). False alarm. (RNLI report) 
 
July 1998 98/251 
A diver carried out several dives over a weekend, on the third dive she made a rapid ascent to stay with a 
buddy who had a buoyancy problem. Four days later she carried out two further dives, safety stops were 
performed. Two days after that she developed a numbness in her face. She visited a recompression facility 
and was treated. This did not resolve the symptoms and it was decided that the problem was not diving 
related. 
 
July 1998 98/389 
Report of divers overdue was received and rescue teams, lifeboat and helicopter were scrambled, however 
the divers surfaced safe and well and all units were stood down. This was NOT an over reaction, it was wise 
to inform the Coastguard. (Coastguard & RNLI report) 
 
July 1998 98/215 
An instructor and a trainee were at a depth of 12m when the trainee signalled that he was not comfortable. 
They made their way back to a depth of 7m. The trainee appeared to be out of breath. They made a normal 
ascent. At the surface the trainee had problems breathing, his chest was tight, he was very pale. Out of the 

water he was given oxygen and after 10 mins recovered. His suit appeared to be quite tight. 
 
July 1998 98/395 
A diver reported overdue surfaced prior to many units arriving on scene. (Coastguard report) 
 
July 1998 98/231 
On a training course at a depth of 20m a trainee panicked. Her instructor brought her to the surface. The 
ascent was slightly faster than normal. No subsequent ill effects were noted. 
 
August 1998 98/296 
Two divers were at 8m during a night dive. One of the divers became trapped in a fishing net. Her buddy had 
to help her remove her diving cylinder and to cut away the netting to enable her to get free. No subsequent ill 
effects are reported. (Newspaper report only). 
 
 
 

NDC Diving Incidents Report 1998 
Overseas Incidents 
Fatalities 
 
November 1997 98/030 
During the final stages of an ascent from a dive, a diver experienced respiratory problems. He was assisted to 
the surface. Soon afterwards he suffered a heart attack from which he did not recover. 
 
May 1998 98/161 
Five pairs of divers were diving on a wreck with a seabed depth of 40m. The last pair in made their way down 
the shotline and was planning to cut the light line that had been secured by the first pair and make sure that 
the shot was free to be lifted. At the wreck one diver heard an exclamation or shout from his buddy and when 
he turned to find out what was wrong the buddy was not to be seen. He made a small search, cut the line, 
made a longer search and then began his ascent. The lost diver was seen to surface by those on the boat. He 
had no mask and seemed to be relaxing on the surface. He failed to acknowledge the boat and the boat was 
moved towards him. A rope was thrown but the diver did not move towards it. A crewmember entered the 
water, the diver's kit was removed and he was lifted into the boat. He was not breathing. Resuscitation 
procedures were started and assistance summonsed by radio. 20 to 30 mins later a launch arrived with 
paramedics aboard. Adrenaline was injected and resuscitation continued for a further 30 mins, at which point 
the diver was pronounced dead. His diving equipment was examined and found to be in order. It is considered 
that a heart attack or stroke may have been the cause. All the other divers were recovered safely. 
 
Decompression 
 
October 1997 98/044 
Towards the end of a diving holiday which involved three dives per day and after a four day break in diving a 
diver conducted two dives. The first was to 39m for 26 mins with 7 mins of stops at 6m, and the second, after 
a 1 hour 14 min surface interval, was to 22m for 41 mins with a 6 mins stop at 6m and a 2 mins stop at 3m. 
These stops were longer than indicated by the diver's computer to match those of a buddy who was diving 
with a more conservative computer. That evening the diver experienced stomach pains and later 'flue-like' 
pains in both shoulders, arms and hands. The buddy had no symptoms. The following day the diver was 
medically examined and possible food poisoning was diagnosed. The diver then under took a long flight home 
during which he experienced 'niggly pains' in his shoulders and finger joints and discomfort in his back 
muscles. The following day, still feeling unwell, the diver sought further medical advice. A neurological 
examination found some deficit and the diver was recompressed. The recompression treatment seemed to 
resolve most of the numbness that had been found in upper arm and leg. The diver was left with some 
residual pain in collarbone to shoulder joints and some numbness returned during the following week with 
accompanying 'dullness in mental ability'. The diver remains under medical investigation. 
 
March 1998 98/117 
A diver had conducted a series of three dives over a 24 hour period, the last to 21m for 42 mins. None of 
these dives involved decompression stops. 2 to 3 hours after the last dive the diver noticed a tingling 
sensation in his hands. He had been driving the boat and it was thought that the cause may have been 
vibration. He did not dive again that day. Later that day the sensation spread to his calves and feet and he 
had an ache in his knees. He had been sleeping and his posture, whilst asleep, is thought to have been a 
possible cause. The diver was taken to hospital for examination. No adverse signs were found. He was 
placed on oxygen but the symptoms did not resolve. The diver was advised not to dive for 28 days and not to 
fly for 7 days. Similar symptoms were experienced on waking 5 days after the last dive. 
 
June 1998 98/203 
A diver completed a dive to 24m for 38 mins including 2 mins stop at 5m. 2 hours 12 mins later he dived again 
to 28m for 37 mins including a 3 mins stop at 5m. Shortly after surfacing he complained of lower back pain 
and then of 'pins and needles' in his lower limbs and of a numbness across the chest. The other divers were 
recalled and the boat headed back. Assistance was sought by radio but the group was informed that none 
would be summonsed until they were ashore. The casualty was given oxygen. A local doctor diagnosed 
hypothermia and recommended that diving the following day should be limited to 10m. He would not seek 
specialist advice. The casualty continued to show symptoms and the group phoned for medical advice. The 
casualty was then flown by helicopter to a recompression facility and treated. 
 
August 1998 98/302 
A diver completed a wreck dive to a maximum depth of 30m for a total of 19 mins. His ascent from 6m took 40 

secs. Once back into the boat he noticed a tingling in his left foot. 5 mins later he developed a tingling in his 
left arm. He was placed on oxygen and medical advice was sought. He was taken to a recompression facility 
for treatment. The symptoms were resolved. 
 
August 1998 98/311 
A diver completed a series of six dives over a three day period. On day three he dived to 33m for 38 mins 
which included 10 mins stop at 9m, 2 hours 38 mins later he dived again, this time to 36m for 28 mins with 4 
mins stop at 6m. These dives were both multi-level and the divers did not violate any decompression 
indicated by their computers. 5 mins after surfacing one of the pair noted a pain in his left upper arm. He was 
given oxygen. He briefly experienced a numbness across his face and down his side. He was airlifted by 
helicopter to a recompression facility for treatment. He was kept in hospital overnight for observation. 
 
Injury/Illness 
 
November 1997 98/029 
Two divers were seen to surface and one began to tow the other. A second pair of divers surfaced close by 
and one signalled an emergency and went to help. The diving casualty was brought to a hardboat in a RHIB. 
The casualty was cyanosed and struggling to breathe. He was coughing up mucus and complaining of cold. 
He was placed on oxygen and taken to harbour where he was transferred to an ambulance. He later made a 
full recovery. The problem was diagnosed as salt water inhalation, although no problem could be found with 
his mouthpiece. The diver was taking beta-blocking prescription drugs. 
 
November 1997 98/057 
A diver was on a hardboat in fairly rough conditions. He became seasick and moved to the rail of the boat. He 
took hold of the rail to steady himself. The painter of a RHIB was tied to this rail further forward and this 
painter came down upon his little finger trapping it against the rail. The finger was 'split from end to end'. 5 
stitches were required and the diver was unable to conduct any further diving on that trip. 
 
November 1997 98/078 
Three divers entered the water to conduct a dive to 20m. They descended a shotline. At 8m one of the divers 
lost a fin and started to descend rapidly. The others followed him to the bottom where he was found to be in 
an uncomfortable and anxious state. He signalled that he wanted to ascend. One of the divers had collected 
the lost fin on the descent offered it for refitting. The diver did not refit his fin and experienced difficulty with 
the ascent. He was breathing rapidly. The dive leader then conducted a controlled buoyant lift on the 
distressed diver, with the other following. They made it safely back to the surface. At the surface a small 
amount of blood was seen to be coming from the distressed diver's ear. Subsequent examination revealed a 
small elliptical tear towards the outer edge of his eardrum. This diver was using borrowed fins and weightbelt, 
it was suggested that he had failed to check for correct weight and fitting of this equipment. 
 
January 1998 98/125 
7 mins into a dive to 18m, a diver attempted to equalise the pressure in his ears. His right ear went suddenly 
cold and he felt and heard a 'whooshing'. He was disorientated for a few seconds. He signalled the problem to 
his buddy and they made a normal ascent. Medical examination revealed a pin hole rupture of his eardrum. 
He had had a previous injury to this ear. 
 
April 1998 98/199 
A diver had experienced problems with ear clearing during recent dives. After a dive to 20m for 30 mins he 
complained of pain in his left ear. He sought medical advice and was given antibiotics and told to return in 
three days, because of an infection the doctor could not diagnose the problem. Subsequent examination, 
three days later, revealed that he had perforated his eardrum. The diver was not aware when this injury had 
happened. 
 
May 1998 98/178 
A trainee on her first open water diver entered the water with an instructor. They dived to a depth of 6m. The 
trainee indicated that she wished to surface, and seemed to have ear trouble at around 3m. At the surface the 
trainee had ear pain and felt dizzy. The trainee was helped ashore and was found to have blood coming from 
her left ear. She was taken to hospital and a ruptured blood vessel was found. She spent the night in hospital 
and was given painkillers and antibiotics. 
 
May 1998 98/155 
A diver conducted a dive to 28m for 23 mins including a 1 min stop at 6m. During the dive a large ship passed 
close and the sound created an 'uncomfortable feeling and throbbing' in the head of one of the divers. As the 
dive progressed this developed into a bad headache. During the ascent the diver felt nauseous. Back on 
board the boat the condition continued and the casualty was placed on oxygen. He then vomited. He was 
taken ashore and given fluids. When standing ashore he noticed a tingling in his feet. He was taken to a 

recompression facility. Still on oxygen, the headache had now resolved. A high level of carbon dioxide was 
thought to have been a potential cause. The casualty was recompressed as a precaution. He was advised not 
to dive for 28 days. No subsequent ill effects were noted. 
 
June 1998 98/184 
A diver entered the water from a boat. A swell caught this diver and his buddy entered on top of him. The 
pillar valve of the second diver caused a 1.5 inch gash on the forehead of the other. Divers in the water were 
recalled and the emergency services alerted by radio. The casualty was taken ashore and from there by 
helicopter to a hospital for treatment. 
 
August 1998 98/273 
Two divers completed a wreck dive to a maximum depth of 40m for a total of 31 mins including a 
precautionary stop of 1 min. Their computers showed a minimum of 5 mins no stop time remaining throughout 
the dive. About 20 mins after the dive one of the divers began to feel unwell. The remaining divers were 
recalled and the boat returned to harbour. The diver was taken to hospital and, by the time she arrived, she 
felt well again. This diver was subsequently given recompression treatment because it was decided by a 
doctor that 38 mins of decompression stops had been missed. Lack of sleep, no food, little or no drink and 
high ambient temperatures are believed to have contributed to the diver's illness. 
 
August 1998 98/301 
A diver completed a dive to 25m for 22 mins. Over 4 hours later he dived again to 21m for 21 mins. During the 
ascent he arrived at 6m but had to return to 13m because his buddy experienced buoyancy control difficulties. 
They re-ascended and spent 1 to 2 mins at 6m before surfacing. 2 hours after the dive he experienced an 
ache in the finger joints of his left hand. He also noticed a pulled muscle in his left shoulder. He sought 
medical advice and was recompressed. This did not resolve the problem and it was concluded that it was due 
to earlier rescue practice in which he had engaged. 
 
Boating / Surface Incidents 
 
October 1997 98/023 
Three pairs of divers entered the water at 10 min intervals to dive a reef at a depth of 27m. After 30 mins the 
first pair deployed a delayed SMB to start their ascent. The SMB split and did not rise to the surface. They 
attempted to deploy a second SMB but this also failed. The pair made their ascent to the surface. There was 
a current flowing and a surface swell. At the surface they were not seen by their boat cover, and they were 
carried away by the current. The other two pairs were recovered normally and when it was realised that the 
first pair was overdue a search was instigated involving several other boats. The lost pair was eventually 
found. No ill effects are reported. 
 
December 1997 98/067 
Two divers planned to conduct a 40 min dive to a maximum depth of 31m. When they were 10 mins overdue 
their boat cover reported them missing. A search was instigated and the divers were recovered 1 hour later 2 
nautical miles from the start point. The divers were not using any SMB and the underwater current was in a 
different direction from the surface current. The searchers were looking in the wrong area and the divers were 
only found after their shouts were heard. They were operating in a remote area in the Middle East and no 
official rescue services were available to the party. 
 
Ascents 
 
June 1998 98/288 
Towards the end of a dive to 20m one of a pair of divers began to deploy a delayed SMB. During the 
deployment the reel jammed and, as it was attached to the diver, she was dragged directly to the surface. Her 
buddy made a normal ascent completing 4 mins of safety stops. The diver who had made the direct ascent 
was placed on oxygen for 45 mins and monitored. Her computer indicated a decompression violation. She 
experienced no subsequent ill effects. Dive duration 23 mins. 
 
Technique 
 
October 1997 98/043 
Two divers were conducting a wreck dive to a maximum depth of 28m. One diver was using air faster than the 
other and indicated when he had only 50 bar remaining. The second diver deployed a delayed SMB and they 
started their ascent. As soon as they did, the first diver ran out of air and reached for the buddy's octopus 
regulator. The octopus regulator was out of position and the diver who was out of air reached for the buddy's 
main regulator. The buddy indicated that he should take this and recovered his octopus regulator. He took a 
few breaths from it and passed it to the diver out of air and recovered his main regulator. The divers found 
that they were making a fast ascent and one of them had to dump air from his neck seal to slow them down 

as his cuff dump was too slow. They completed a stop of 2 mins at 6m, and then completed their ascent. No 
subsequent ill effects are reported. 
 
December 1997 98/066 
Two divers began a descent and the dive leader decided to launch a delayed SMB at 9m because there was 
a strong current. To prevent being swept along with the current the diver held on to the line from a fishing pot. 
Struggling to deploy the SMB with one hand one of the lines of the SMB became tangled around the diver's 
regulator. As the bag lifted it pulled the regulator from his mouth. Further entanglement prevented him from 
reaching his octopus regulator and he decided to make a free ascent. He signalled this to his buddy and both 
made it safely to the surface. The dive was aborted at this point. 
 
Equipment 
 
April 1998 98/146 
15 mins into a dive and at a depth of 25m a diver checked his contents gauge. As he did so it 'exploded into a 
mass of bubbles'. He moved to his buddy, showed him the problem, and was passed the buddy's octopus 
regulator. They made a controlled ascent. Subsequent examination of the contents gauge showed that an 'O' 
ring in the swivel had blown out. Neither diver suffered ill effects from the event. 
 
April 1998 98/183 
Two divers were diving to 15m for a training drill. At 10m the high pressure hose of one of the divers burst 
near the first stage. His contents gauge showed a drop in pressure from 200 bar to 50 bar 'in seconds'. His 
buddy gave him his octopus regulator and they ascended safely to the surface. 
 
September 1998 98/300 
Two divers conducting a wreck dive descended to the seabed at a depth of 30m. On arrival one of the divers 
turned himself into an upright position to land feet first and put some air into his BC to regain neutral 
buoyancy. As he reached the bottom his weightbelt slipped off of his hips and onto the seabed. He dumped 
the air from his BC and tried to swim down to his weightbelt. He could not do so and swam to the wreck, 
taking hold of it to prevent an ascent. His buddy recovered the weightbelt and returned it to him. The belt was 
refitted and the dive continued normally. This diver was using a neoprene suit for the first time at this depth 
and it is believed that suit compression contributed.  
 
Miscellaneous 
 
October 1997 98/041 
At the end of a reef dive a dive guide lead a group of six divers into a cave system at a depth of 2 to 4m. The 
cave became a narrow, poorly lit tunnel and the divers had no torches. One of the divers became stuck in a 
narrow passage and had to force his way through. The divers stirred up silt and the visibility became poor. 
After about 30m into the cave system the divers entered a small chamber and the last two became separated 
from the others and were unable to find the way forward. A small fissure lead from the cave to the surface and 
one of the two divers removed his BC and cylinder and squeezed through to the surface. The second diver 
decided that he could not follow and sought a way out through the tunnels. When this second diver found his 
way to clear water he had less than one minute of air left and was badly cut and scratched from contact with 
the narrow passages. 
 
May 1998 98/192 
A trainee and an instructor entered the water to dive to a wreck at a depth of 10m. 8 mins into the dive the 
trainee gave the 'all is not well' signal. The instructor indicated to ascend. The trainee returned the signal but 
did not move. The signal was repeated but this time the trainee ignored it. The instructor then brought the 
trainee to the surface with a controlled buoyant lift. She was recovered into the boat and helped to de-kit. She 
showed signs of hyperventilation. 
 
 

NDC Diving Incidents Report 1998 
Overseas Incidents 
Fatalities 
 
November 1997 98/030 
During the final stages of an ascent from a dive, a diver experienced respiratory problems. He was assisted to 
the surface. Soon afterwards he suffered a heart attack from which he did not recover. 
 
May 1998 98/161 
Five pairs of divers were diving on a wreck with a seabed depth of 40m. The last pair in made their way down 
the shotline and was planning to cut the light line that had been secured by the first pair and make sure that 
the shot was free to be lifted. At the wreck one diver heard an exclamation or shout from his buddy and when 
he turned to find out what was wrong the buddy was not to be seen. He made a small search, cut the line, 
made a longer search and then began his ascent. The lost diver was seen to surface by those on the boat. He 
had no mask and seemed to be relaxing on the surface. He failed to acknowledge the boat and the boat was 
moved towards him. A rope was thrown but the diver did not move towards it. A crewmember entered the 
water, the diver's kit was removed and he was lifted into the boat. He was not breathing. Resuscitation 
procedures were started and assistance summonsed by radio. 20 to 30 mins later a launch arrived with 
paramedics aboard. Adrenaline was injected and resuscitation continued for a further 30 mins, at which point 
the diver was pronounced dead. His diving equipment was examined and found to be in order. It is considered 
that a heart attack or stroke may have been the cause. All the other divers were recovered safely. 
 
Decompression 
 
October 1997 98/044 
Towards the end of a diving holiday which involved three dives per day and after a four day break in diving a 
diver conducted two dives. The first was to 39m for 26 mins with 7 mins of stops at 6m, and the second, after 
a 1 hour 14 min surface interval, was to 22m for 41 mins with a 6 mins stop at 6m and a 2 mins stop at 3m. 
These stops were longer than indicated by the diver's computer to match those of a buddy who was diving 
with a more conservative computer. That evening the diver experienced stomach pains and later 'flue-like' 
pains in both shoulders, arms and hands. The buddy had no symptoms. The following day the diver was 
medically examined and possible food poisoning was diagnosed. The diver then under took a long flight home 
during which he experienced 'niggly pains' in his shoulders and finger joints and discomfort in his back 
muscles. The following day, still feeling unwell, the diver sought further medical advice. A neurological 
examination found some deficit and the diver was recompressed. The recompression treatment seemed to 
resolve most of the numbness that had been found in upper arm and leg. The diver was left with some 
residual pain in collarbone to shoulder joints and some numbness returned during the following week with 
accompanying 'dullness in mental ability'. The diver remains under medical investigation. 
 
March 1998 98/117 
A diver had conducted a series of three dives over a 24 hour period, the last to 21m for 42 mins. None of 
these dives involved decompression stops. 2 to 3 hours after the last dive the diver noticed a tingling 
sensation in his hands. He had been driving the boat and it was thought that the cause may have been 
vibration. He did not dive again that day. Later that day the sensation spread to his calves and feet and he 
had an ache in his knees. He had been sleeping and his posture, whilst asleep, is thought to have been a 
possible cause. The diver was taken to hospital for examination. No adverse signs were found. He was 
placed on oxygen but the symptoms did not resolve. The diver was advised not to dive for 28 days and not to 
fly for 7 days. Similar symptoms were experienced on waking 5 days after the last dive. 
 
June 1998 98/203 
A diver completed a dive to 24m for 38 mins including 2 mins stop at 5m. 2 hours 12 mins later he dived again 
to 28m for 37 mins including a 3 mins stop at 5m. Shortly after surfacing he complained of lower back pain 
and then of 'pins and needles' in his lower limbs and of a numbness across the chest. The other divers were 
recalled and the boat headed back. Assistance was sought by radio but the group was informed that none 
would be summonsed until they were ashore. The casualty was given oxygen. A local doctor diagnosed 
hypothermia and recommended that diving the following day should be limited to 10m. He would not seek 
specialist advice. The casualty continued to show symptoms and the group phoned for medical advice. The 
casualty was then flown by helicopter to a recompression facility and treated. 
 
August 1998 98/302 
A diver completed a wreck dive to a maximum depth of 30m for a total of 19 mins. His ascent from 6m took 40 

secs. Once back into the boat he noticed a tingling in his left foot. 5 mins later he developed a tingling in his 
left arm. He was placed on oxygen and medical advice was sought. He was taken to a recompression facility 
for treatment. The symptoms were resolved. 
 
August 1998 98/311 
A diver completed a series of six dives over a three day period. On day three he dived to 33m for 38 mins 
which included 10 mins stop at 9m, 2 hours 38 mins later he dived again, this time to 36m for 28 mins with 4 
mins stop at 6m. These dives were both multi-level and the divers did not violate any decompression 
indicated by their computers. 5 mins after surfacing one of the pair noted a pain in his left upper arm. He was 
given oxygen. He briefly experienced a numbness across his face and down his side. He was airlifted by 
helicopter to a recompression facility for treatment. He was kept in hospital overnight for observation. 
 
Injury/Illness 
 
November 1997 98/029 
Two divers were seen to surface and one began to tow the other. A second pair of divers surfaced close by 
and one signalled an emergency and went to help. The diving casualty was brought to a hardboat in a RHIB. 
The casualty was cyanosed and struggling to breathe. He was coughing up mucus and complaining of cold. 
He was placed on oxygen and taken to harbour where he was transferred to an ambulance. He later made a 
full recovery. The problem was diagnosed as salt water inhalation, although no problem could be found with 
his mouthpiece. The diver was taking beta-blocking prescription drugs. 
 
November 1997 98/057 
A diver was on a hardboat in fairly rough conditions. He became seasick and moved to the rail of the boat. He 
took hold of the rail to steady himself. The painter of a RHIB was tied to this rail further forward and this 
painter came down upon his little finger trapping it against the rail. The finger was 'split from end to end'. 5 
stitches were required and the diver was unable to conduct any further diving on that trip. 
 
November 1997 98/078 
Three divers entered the water to conduct a dive to 20m. They descended a shotline. At 8m one of the divers 
lost a fin and started to descend rapidly. The others followed him to the bottom where he was found to be in 
an uncomfortable and anxious state. He signalled that he wanted to ascend. One of the divers had collected 
the lost fin on the descent offered it for refitting. The diver did not refit his fin and experienced difficulty with 
the ascent. He was breathing rapidly. The dive leader then conducted a controlled buoyant lift on the 
distressed diver, with the other following. They made it safely back to the surface. At the surface a small 
amount of blood was seen to be coming from the distressed diver's ear. Subsequent examination revealed a 
small elliptical tear towards the outer edge of his eardrum. This diver was using borrowed fins and weightbelt, 
it was suggested that he had failed to check for correct weight and fitting of this equipment. 
 
January 1998 98/125 
7 mins into a dive to 18m, a diver attempted to equalise the pressure in his ears. His right ear went suddenly 
cold and he felt and heard a 'whooshing'. He was disorientated for a few seconds. He signalled the problem to 
his buddy and they made a normal ascent. Medical examination revealed a pin hole rupture of his eardrum. 
He had had a previous injury to this ear. 
 
April 1998 98/199 
A diver had experienced problems with ear clearing during recent dives. After a dive to 20m for 30 mins he 
complained of pain in his left ear. He sought medical advice and was given antibiotics and told to return in 
three days, because of an infection the doctor could not diagnose the problem. Subsequent examination, 
three days later, revealed that he had perforated his eardrum. The diver was not aware when this injury had 
happened. 
 
May 1998 98/178 
A trainee on her first open water diver entered the water with an instructor. They dived to a depth of 6m. The 
trainee indicated that she wished to surface, and seemed to have ear trouble at around 3m. At the surface the 
trainee had ear pain and felt dizzy. The trainee was helped ashore and was found to have blood coming from 
her left ear. She was taken to hospital and a ruptured blood vessel was found. She spent the night in hospital 
and was given painkillers and antibiotics. 
 
May 1998 98/155 
A diver conducted a dive to 28m for 23 mins including a 1 min stop at 6m. During the dive a large ship passed 
close and the sound created an 'uncomfortable feeling and throbbing' in the head of one of the divers. As the 
dive progressed this developed into a bad headache. During the ascent the diver felt nauseous. Back on 
board the boat the condition continued and the casualty was placed on oxygen. He then vomited. He was 
taken ashore and given fluids. When standing ashore he noticed a tingling in his feet. He was taken to a 

recompression facility. Still on oxygen, the headache had now resolved. A high level of carbon dioxide was 
thought to have been a potential cause. The casualty was recompressed as a precaution. He was advised not 
to dive for 28 days. No subsequent ill effects were noted. 
 
June 1998 98/184 
A diver entered the water from a boat. A swell caught this diver and his buddy entered on top of him. The 
pillar valve of the second diver caused a 1.5 inch gash on the forehead of the other. Divers in the water were 
recalled and the emergency services alerted by radio. The casualty was taken ashore and from there by 
helicopter to a hospital for treatment. 
 
August 1998 98/273 
Two divers completed a wreck dive to a maximum depth of 40m for a total of 31 mins including a 
precautionary stop of 1 min. Their computers showed a minimum of 5 mins no stop time remaining throughout 
the dive. About 20 mins after the dive one of the divers began to feel unwell. The remaining divers were 
recalled and the boat returned to harbour. The diver was taken to hospital and, by the time she arrived, she 
felt well again. This diver was subsequently given recompression treatment because it was decided by a 
doctor that 38 mins of decompression stops had been missed. Lack of sleep, no food, little or no drink and 
high ambient temperatures are believed to have contributed to the diver's illness. 
 
August 1998 98/301 
A diver completed a dive to 25m for 22 mins. Over 4 hours later he dived again to 21m for 21 mins. During the 
ascent he arrived at 6m but had to return to 13m because his buddy experienced buoyancy control difficulties. 
They re-ascended and spent 1 to 2 mins at 6m before surfacing. 2 hours after the dive he experienced an 
ache in the finger joints of his left hand. He also noticed a pulled muscle in his left shoulder. He sought 
medical advice and was recompressed. This did not resolve the problem and it was concluded that it was due 
to earlier rescue practice in which he had engaged. 
 
Boating / Surface Incidents 
 
October 1997 98/023 
Three pairs of divers entered the water at 10 min intervals to dive a reef at a depth of 27m. After 30 mins the 
first pair deployed a delayed SMB to start their ascent. The SMB split and did not rise to the surface. They 
attempted to deploy a second SMB but this also failed. The pair made their ascent to the surface. There was 
a current flowing and a surface swell. At the surface they were not seen by their boat cover, and they were 
carried away by the current. The other two pairs were recovered normally and when it was realised that the 
first pair was overdue a search was instigated involving several other boats. The lost pair was eventually 
found. No ill effects are reported. 
 
December 1997 98/067 
Two divers planned to conduct a 40 min dive to a maximum depth of 31m. When they were 10 mins overdue 
their boat cover reported them missing. A search was instigated and the divers were recovered 1 hour later 2 
nautical miles from the start point. The divers were not using any SMB and the underwater current was in a 
different direction from the surface current. The searchers were looking in the wrong area and the divers were 
only found after their shouts were heard. They were operating in a remote area in the Middle East and no 
official rescue services were available to the party. 
 
Ascents 
 
June 1998 98/288 
Towards the end of a dive to 20m one of a pair of divers began to deploy a delayed SMB. During the 
deployment the reel jammed and, as it was attached to the diver, she was dragged directly to the surface. Her 
buddy made a normal ascent completing 4 mins of safety stops. The diver who had made the direct ascent 
was placed on oxygen for 45 mins and monitored. Her computer indicated a decompression violation. She 
experienced no subsequent ill effects. Dive duration 23 mins. 
 
Technique 
 
October 1997 98/043 
Two divers were conducting a wreck dive to a maximum depth of 28m. One diver was using air faster than the 
other and indicated when he had only 50 bar remaining. The second diver deployed a delayed SMB and they 
started their ascent. As soon as they did, the first diver ran out of air and reached for the buddy's octopus 
regulator. The octopus regulator was out of position and the diver who was out of air reached for the buddy's 
main regulator. The buddy indicated that he should take this and recovered his octopus regulator. He took a 
few breaths from it and passed it to the diver out of air and recovered his main regulator. The divers found 
that they were making a fast ascent and one of them had to dump air from his neck seal to slow them down 

as his cuff dump was too slow. They completed a stop of 2 mins at 6m, and then completed their ascent. No 
subsequent ill effects are reported. 
 
December 1997 98/066 
Two divers began a descent and the dive leader decided to launch a delayed SMB at 9m because there was 
a strong current. To prevent being swept along with the current the diver held on to the line from a fishing pot. 
Struggling to deploy the SMB with one hand one of the lines of the SMB became tangled around the diver's 
regulator. As the bag lifted it pulled the regulator from his mouth. Further entanglement prevented him from 
reaching his octopus regulator and he decided to make a free ascent. He signalled this to his buddy and both 
made it safely to the surface. The dive was aborted at this point. 
 
Equipment 
 
April 1998 98/146 
15 mins into a dive and at a depth of 25m a diver checked his contents gauge. As he did so it 'exploded into a 
mass of bubbles'. He moved to his buddy, showed him the problem, and was passed the buddy's octopus 
regulator. They made a controlled ascent. Subsequent examination of the contents gauge showed that an 'O' 
ring in the swivel had blown out. Neither diver suffered ill effects from the event. 
 
April 1998 98/183 
Two divers were diving to 15m for a training drill. At 10m the high pressure hose of one of the divers burst 
near the first stage. His contents gauge showed a drop in pressure from 200 bar to 50 bar 'in seconds'. His 
buddy gave him his octopus regulator and they ascended safely to the surface. 
 
September 1998 98/300 
Two divers conducting a wreck dive descended to the seabed at a depth of 30m. On arrival one of the divers 
turned himself into an upright position to land feet first and put some air into his BC to regain neutral 
buoyancy. As he reached the bottom his weightbelt slipped off of his hips and onto the seabed. He dumped 
the air from his BC and tried to swim down to his weightbelt. He could not do so and swam to the wreck, 
taking hold of it to prevent an ascent. His buddy recovered the weightbelt and returned it to him. The belt was 
refitted and the dive continued normally. This diver was using a neoprene suit for the first time at this depth 
and it is believed that suit compression contributed.  
 
Miscellaneous 
 
October 1997 98/041 
At the end of a reef dive a dive guide lead a group of six divers into a cave system at a depth of 2 to 4m. The 
cave became a narrow, poorly lit tunnel and the divers had no torches. One of the divers became stuck in a 
narrow passage and had to force his way through. The divers stirred up silt and the visibility became poor. 
After about 30m into the cave system the divers entered a small chamber and the last two became separated 
from the others and were unable to find the way forward. A small fissure lead from the cave to the surface and 
one of the two divers removed his BC and cylinder and squeezed through to the surface. The second diver 
decided that he could not follow and sought a way out through the tunnels. When this second diver found his 
way to clear water he had less than one minute of air left and was badly cut and scratched from contact with 
the narrow passages. 
 
May 1998 98/192 
A trainee and an instructor entered the water to dive to a wreck at a depth of 10m. 8 mins into the dive the 
trainee gave the 'all is not well' signal. The instructor indicated to ascend. The trainee returned the signal but 
did not move. The signal was repeated but this time the trainee ignored it. The instructor then brought the 
trainee to the surface with a controlled buoyant lift. She was recovered into the boat and helped to de-kit. She 
showed signs of hyperventilation. 
 
 

NDC Diving Incidents Report 1998 
Statistical Summary of Incidents 
 
 
 
 
Incidents by Category 
 
 
 
Incident Report Source Analysis
  
 
1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 
Incidents 
Reported
199 123 263 385 351 315 397 452 
Incidents 
Analysed
199 123 263 385 351 315 370 431 
British 
Incidents
170 98 236 322 318 295 349 404 
Overseas 
Incidents
24 14 21 9 33 20 21 27 
Unknown 
Locations
5 11 6 54 0 0 0 0 
BSAC 
Members
111 110 146 164 157 136 101 135 
Non-BSAC 
Members
18 13 19 8 20 4 29 52 
Membership 
Unknown
70 0 98 213 178 175 219 217 

 
 
History of Diving Fatalities 
 
 
  No. Of 
Fatalities 
Year Membership BSAC Non-
BSAC
1965 6,813 3 -
1966 7,979 1 4
1967 8,350 1 6
1968 9,241 2 1
1969 11,299 2 8
1970 13,721 4 4
1971 14,898 0 4
1972 17,041 10 31
1973 19,332 9 20
1974 22,150 3 11
1975 23,204 2 -
1976 25,310 4 -
1977 25,342 3 -
1978 27,510 8 4
1979 30,579 5 8

 
 
 
 
1980 24,900 6 7
1981 27,834 5 7
1982 29,590 6 3
1983 32,177 7 2
1984 32,950 8 5
1985 34,861 8 6
1986 34,210 6 9
1987 34,500 6 2
1988 32,960 10 6
1989 34,422 4 8
1990 36,434 3 6
1991 43,475 8 9
1992 45,626 9 8
1993 50,722 3 6
1994 50,505 6 6
1995 52,364 9 9
1996 48,920 7 9
1997 48,412 4 12
1998 46,712 6 16

