 The British Sub-Aqua Club 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NDC Diving Incidents Report  
2005 
 
 
Compiled by 
 
Brian Cumming 
 
Diving Safety and Incidents Advisor 
 
Published by The British Sub-Aqua Club in the interests of diving safety  

 ` NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
Introduction 
 
This booklet contains the 2005 Diving Incidents Report, produced by The British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) in the 
interest of promoting diving safety.  It is important to note that it contains details of UK sports diving incidents 
occurring to divers of all affiliations, plus incidents occurring worldwide involving BSAC members.  
 
Report Format 
The majority of statistical information contained within this report is also shown in graphical form.  Please note that all 
statistical information is produced from UK data only and does not include Overseas Incidents unless noted as ‘All 
Incidents’. 
 
The contents of this report are split into an overview of the year, and then the details of nine incident categories plus some 
historical analyses.  The various sections can be found as shown below:- 
 
 i) Overview Page  1 
 ii) Fatalities Page 5 
 iii) Decompression Incidents Page  7 
 iv) Injury / illness Page  17 
 v) Boating & Surface Incidents Page  22 
 vi) Ascent Problems Page  28 
 vii) Technique Problems Page  37 
 viii) Equipment Problems Page  40 
 ix) Miscellaneous Incidents Page  43 
 x) Overseas Incidents Page  45 
 xi) Numerical & Statistical Analyses Page  48 
 xii) List of Abbreviations Page  50 
 
 
Within each category the incidents are listed in the order of their occurrence, not necessarily that of Incident Reference.  
They are laid out in the following form: 
 
  MONTH/YEAR OF INCIDENT  INCIDENT REF.    
  Brief Narrative of Incident.................................................................................... 
  ........................................................................................................ 
 
The nature of many diving incidents is such that there is usually more than one cause or effect.  Where this is the case the 
incident has been classified under the more appropriate cause or effect. For instance an incident involving a fast ascent, 
causing decompression illness, will be classified under 'Decompression Incidents'. 
 
Brian Cumming, 
BSAC Diving Incidents Advisor, 
November 2005 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
Data for this report are collected from several different sources.  I would like to extend my thanks and appreciation to the 
following for their assistance in its production and in ensuring its completeness: 
 
 Ken Bazeley, National Diving Liaison Officer, Maritime & Coastguard Agency  
Peter Chennell, Sea Safety Manager, 
Derek Scrivener, Service Information Data Quality Supervisor,  
Roger Aldham, Data and Statistical Analyst, 
Royal National Lifeboat Institution 
and, in particular, all of those divers and other sources who have taken the 
trouble to complete Incident Reports and share their learning experience with 
others. 
Finally, to Dr. Yvonne Couch for proof reading this report 
 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
Overview 
 
has seen the highest ever number of UK 
incidents reported; a total of 441.  The chart 
below shows the total of UK incidents reported 
annually over the last 15 years and it can be seen that, after a 
jump in the early 90s there has been a steady increase of about 
11 incidents per year with perturbations of plus or minus up to 
50 incidents per year around this trend line.  It is not known if 
this increasing trend is the result of more incidents, more diving, 
better data capture or a combination of some or all of these 
factors. 
 
 
 
Number of reported incidents 
0
100
200
300
400
500
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95 6 7 8 9
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05
 
 
 
The distribution of reported incidents is shown in the following 
chart.  As can be seen, 67% of these incidents have occurred in 
the summer period.  This is totally consistent with previous 
years, reflecting the increased number of dives that take place 
during the warmer weather.  
 
Monthly breakdown of all incidents - 2005 
O
ct
.  
'0
4
N
ov
.
D
ec
.
Ja
n.
 '0
5
Fe
b.
M
ar
.
A
pr
.
M
ay
Ju
ne Ju
ly
A
ug
.
Se
pt
. 0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
 
Incidents by category 
The incident database categorises all incidents into one of nine 
major categories, and the following chart shows the distribution 
of the 2005 incidents into those categories.  
The highest number of incidents (110) relate to ‘Decompression 
Illness (DCI)' and this is consistent with previous years, 
although there does seem to be a decline from a peak of 144 in 
2002.  Many of the ‘Injury and Illness’ incidents are also thought 
to be DCI related, but they are reported by the RNLI as ‘Diver 
illness’ and the cause of the illness is not defined. 
Last year I highlighted the 
associated with abnormal asc
98 ascent related incidents, t
and a 23% increase over th
record.    
The following analysis reveals
 
Basic nature of the report:- 
 81 Rapid asc
 28 Missed st
Clearly some incidents relate 
 
Causal factors are:- 
 17 Delayed S
 12 Drysuit or
 11 Weight re
 10  During tra
   9 Out of air
   8 Regulator
Again some have a combinati
 
When all of the above causal
(50%) remain where a simple 
have been the cause.  With
factors being present diver
correctly control their rate of 
skill are the only explanations
and instructors should make th
Many DCI cases have their ro
been recorded under the DCI 
often the same, so the actual
be significantly higher than sh
 
'Boating and Surface' inciden
Recent years have seen a 
incidents from a maximum 
numbers indicate a levelling o
these incidents and the incre
has displaced ‘Boating and S
place. 
Although the numbers are ve
cases where divers were st
resulting in very serious injur
escape in another. 
 
Categorisation of all the yea
0 20
Overseas
Fatalities
Technique
Equipment
Miscellaneous
Injury / Illness
Boat / surface
Ascents
DCI
 
 
2005 
Incident year 
©BSAC - 2005  rise in the number of incidents 
ents.  This year’s report contains 
he highest number ever recorded 
e 2004 total, which was itself a 
 some of the issues:- 
ents 
ops 
to both the above 
MB, mask, fin problem 
 BCD issues 
lated issues 
ining 
 
 free flow 
on of the above factors 
 factors are excluded 47 incidents 
loss of buoyancy control seems to 
out any of the above perturbing 
s have simply been unable to 
ascent.  Poor training and lack of 
.  These are avoidable problems 
is a priority area for attention. 
ots in these problems; they have 
heading but the causal factors are 19
9
19
9
19
9
19
9 number of abnormal ascents will 
own above.   
ts are the third largest category.  
decline in the number of these 
of 124 in 1998 and the 2005 
ut at just under 90.  The decline in 
ase in ‘Ascent’ related incidents 
urface’ from its traditional second 
ry low, this year saw a number of 
ruck by boats and/or propellers; 
ies in one case and a very lucky 
r’s incidents 
40 60 80 100 120
Number of incidents
  1 

 ` NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
Fatalities 
17 fatal incidents occurred in the UK during the 2005 incident 
year.  This is entirely in line with the average of 17.8 fatalities 
per year over the last ten years.   
2004 saw 25 fatalities and raised concerns that we might be 
experiencing the beginnings of a trend of increasing fatalities.  
At the time the BSAC argued that this unfortunate number was 
simply the result of natural perturbations of very small numbers 
in a very large sample, compounded with the timing of the 
incidents and the timing of our incident year.  The 2005 total 
seems to support this argument. 
The 17 includes two double fatalities.  5 of the 17 were BSAC 
members. 
 
The factors associated with these fatalities can be summarised 
as follows:- 
• Two cases involved people who suffered a serious medical 
problem (typically a heart attack) whilst they were diving.  
There is a third case which may well also be included in this 
group when the full facts are made known.  
• Three cases involved divers who were, or who became, 
negatively buoyant and sank.  In two cases divers were at 
the surface, in difficulties, but were unable to remain at the 
surface and sank before they could be recovered.  Last 
year 8 out of the 25 fatalities were affected in this way. 
• Four cases involved separation.   
In each of these cases the separation was not planned.   
Two cases involved three divers diving together.  In one 
case the separated diver survived and the remaining two 
became one of the double fatalities.  In the other case a 
problem arose during the ascent, two surfaced but the third 
did not.  
The third case involved a separation during an ascent 
where one of the divers did not make it to the surface. 
• One case involved a hose failure which led to an out of air 
condition. 
• Four cases involved solo diving.  In each case they 
intentionally dived alone.  One case involved a cave diver 
who became tangled in ropes.  Two cases involved very 
deep dives; one to 60m and the other to 68m. 
• Two cases involved divers running out of breathing gas.  
One was due to an equipment failure as defined above.  
The second was a result of divers going back into the water, 
after a dive, to recover lost equipment. 
• Three cases involved rebreathers. 
 
Often multiple causes were involved in an incident and in nine 
of these fatal incidents there is insufficient information available 
to be clear about the exact chain of events and root causes. 
 
As stated above, four of the year’s fatalities involved solo diving 
and to throw more light on these events I conducted a study of 
the database.  The current database goes back to 1998 and it 
contains 138 fatal incidents (UK).  8 of these incidents involved 
double fatalities, giving a total of 146 deaths.  Of this total, 19 
relate to solo diving.  This means that 13% of our fatalities were 
solo divers and we can be sure that this is very significantly 
higher than the fraction of dives that are conducted solo.  
People might be tempted to point at the double fatalities and 
argue that 8 lives would have been saved if the incidents had 
been solo dives.  This may be true but every year we report a 
number of incidents where an attentive buddy has clearly saved 
another’s life by taking the appropriate remedial actions.  My 
guess is that these cases outnumber the double fatalities by a 
factor of five or more.   
 
Finally there were three reported fatality overseas.  Two cases 
involved the deaths of BSAC members.  The third case involved 
BSAC members in the death of a non member. 
 
 
 
Incident depths 
The following chart shows the maximum depth of the dives 
during which incidents took place categorised into depth range 
groupings. 
 
 
Maximum depth n incident 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
>60m
51-60m
41-50m
31-40m
21-30m
11-20m
1-10m
Surf.
Unknown
Number of incidents 
  
The pattern of depths in the 0m to 50m range is very similar to 
that normally seen and reflects the amount of diving that takes 
place in these depth ranges.  The number of incidents reported 
in the greater than 50m range is 10, which is in line with 
previous years.  However 2 of these 10 were fatal incidents, 
again indicating the risks associated with deep diving. 
  
The BSAC advises that no air dive should be deeper than 50m, 
and that dives to 50m should only be conducted by divers who 
are appropriately trained and qualified.   
The recommended limit for divers trained to Sports Diver 
standard is 35m and then only when they have received 
appropriate training for diving at this depth. 
The BSAC recommends that mixed gas diving should be to a 
maximum depth of 70m and then only when the diver holds a 
recognized qualification to conduct such dives.   
 
 
The next chart shows the depth at which the incident started. 
 
Depth at which an incident started 
0 20 40
>60m
51-60m
41-50m
31-40m
21-30m
11-20m
1-10m
Surf.
Unknown
 
Inevitably the data ar
since many incidents
surface.  Critical amon
always the casualty is 
noted.  This partially e
cases as this includes 
Other surface incidents
  
2      e 
 h
g 
ou
xp
di
 i of dive involving a60 80 100 120 140 160 180
Number of incidents 
 
biased towards the shallower depths 
appen during the ascent or at the 
these are the DCI cases where almost 
t of the water before any problems are 
lains the large occurrence of ‘Surface’ 
vers with DCI who have left the water. 
nvolve boats and boating incidents. 
  ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
Diver Qualifications 
The next two charts show the qualification of those BSAC 
members who were involved in reported incidents.    
The first looks at the diver qualification. 
 
 
Qualification of the divers involved in incidents 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
1st  C lass
A d vanced
D ive Lead er
Sp ort s D iver
C lub / Ocean
N ovice
Sno rkel
 
 
 
These data are in line with the normal pattern of previous years 
and, to some extent, reflect the number of divers in these 
qualification grades. 
 
 
 
The next chart shows an analysis of incident by instructor 
qualification and again it is consistent with previous years.   
 
 
Qualification of instructors involved in incidents 
0 10 20 30
National
Advanced
Open Water
Club
Assistant Club
Snorkel
Unknown
 
 
 
 
 
 
Divers’ use of the Emergency Services 
Divers’ use of the emergency services shows a monthly 
distribution aligned to the distribution of all incidents, and is 
clearly correlated with the number of dives that are taking place. 
 
Our demands upon the Coastguard service seem to be on a 
very gentle increase, having risen by about 40 cases during the 
last 8 years, an overall rise of about 20% in that time period.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UK Incidents involving the Coastguard agency 
 - Monthly breakdown 
O
ct
. '
04 N
ov
.
D
ec
.
Ja
n.
 '0
5
Fe
b.
M
ar
.
A
pr
.
M
ay
Ju
ne Ju
ly
A
ug
.
Se
pt
. 0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Incidents invovling HM Coastguard: 241  
 
 
 
Our call upon the RNLI in the 2005 incident year is up from 
2004, and incident numbers seem to have increased back to 
the level of those reported at the end of the 90s 
Number of divers 
 
 
Divers’ use of RNLI facilities by month 
O
ct
. '
04
N
ov
.
D
ec
.
Ja
n.
 '0
5
Fe
b.
M
ar
.
A
pr
.
M
ay
Ju
ne Ju
ly
A
ug
.
Se
pt
. 0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Incidents involving Lifeboats: 114
 
 
 
In 2005 137 incidents involve the use of helicopters, and this is 
the highest number recorded.    
Helicopters are tasked to support searches for missing divers 
and to transport divers with DCI to recompression facilities.  In 
the mid 90s helicopters were involved in about 20% of diving 
incidents; this number has steadily risen to about 35%.  It is 
clear that we are seeing a general increase in the availability 
and use of helicopters for these tasks.   Number of instructors 
 
 
Divers’ use of SAR helicopters by month 
O
ct
. '
04
N
ov
.
D
ec
.
Ja
n.
 '0
5
Fe
b.
M
ar
.
A
pr
.
M
ay
Ju
ne Ju
ly
A
ug
.
Se
pt
. 0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Incidents involving helicopters : 137
 
©BSAC - 2005    3 

 ` NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
 
 
Decompression Incidents 
The BSAC database contains 110 reports of DCI incidents in 
the 2005 incident year, some of which involved more than one 
casualty.  When these multiple cases are counted the result is 
120 cases of DCI. 
This number continues the decline in cases of DCI from a peak 
of 173 individual cases reported in 2002 and returns us to the 
typical levels reported in the late 90s. 
  
An analysis of the causal factors associated with the cases for 
2005 indicates the following major features:- 
40 involved rapid ascents 
30 involved diving to deeper than 30m 
28 involved repeat diving  
19 involved missed decompression stops  
Some cases involved more than one of these causes. 
 
Whilst cases of DCI may have declined, as reported earlier, 
cases of abnormal ascent (rapid ascent and/or missed stops) 
have significantly increased, and it may just be a case of good 
fortune that these abnormal ascents have not resulted in DCI. 
 
Conclusions 
Key conclusions are:- 
• Reported incidents are in line with the trends of recent 
years. 
• The number of fatalities is in line with the norms of previous 
years. 
• Fatal incidents associated with solo and trio diving continue 
to feature. 
• Incidents associated with abnormal ascents have risen 
dramatically and attention must be given to training in this 
area and the continuous practice of ascent skills. 
 
As has been stated many times before, most of the incidents 
reported within this document could have been avoided had 
those involved followed a few basic principles of safe diving 
practice.  The BSAC publishes a booklet called 'Safe Diving' 
(latest edition May 2002).  This booklet summarises all the key 
elements of safe diving and is available to all, free of charge, 
through BSAC HQ. 
 
Remember you can never have too much practice and the 
further you stay away from the limits of your own personal 
capabilities the more likely you are to continue to enjoy your 
diving. 
 
 
Please browse through the details in this report and use them to 
learn from others’ mistakes. They have had the courage and 
generosity to record their experiences for publication, the least 
that we can do is to use this information to avoid similar 
problems. 
 
 
Finally, if you must have an incident please report it on our 
Incident Report form, available free from BSAC HQ or via the 
BSAC website.   
 
As always, your anonymity is assured – great care is taken to 
preserve the confidentiality of any personal information 
recorded in BSAC Incident Reports. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4        ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
Fatalities 
 
October 2004 05/001 
Two divers were found unconscious at the bottom of a shotline 
by other divers.  Shetland Coastguard received a call from dive 
support vessel reporting having two divers on the surface inert 
and unresponsive, the skipper also stating being unable to bring 
them aboard alone.  Another vessel proceeded to the site, 
Shetland Coastguard requested launch of Longhope lifeboat.  
The lifeboat recovered the two divers and continued CPR until 
met by doctors, ambulances and Coastguard teams at the 
harbour.  Both casualties pronounced dead on scene by doctor.  
(Coastguard, RNLI & Media reports). 
March 2005 05/074 
A cave diver failed to return from a solo dive.  Other divers later 
found his body tangled in ropes that were already in place.  
(Media report). 
March 2005 05/041 
A diver was engaged in a training course.  Whilst entering the 
water from a beach he became unwell and then collapsed.  
Resuscitation techniques were applied but the casualty died.  
Initial reports suggest that the death was due to a heart attack.  
 
 
 
 
UK Fatalities - Monthly breakdown  
from October 2004 to September 2005  incl. 
 
O
ct
. '
04 N
ov D
ec
.
Ja
n.
 '0
5
Fe
b.
M
ar
.
A
pr
.
M
ay Ju
ne Ju
ly
A
ug
.
Se
pt
.
0
1
2
3
4
 
 
 
April 2005 05/075 
A diver became inverted at a depth of 6m and ascended feet 
first.  He spat out his regulator.  His buddy tried to replace it and 
to turn him the right way up.  The buddy was pushed away.  
Another member of the group succeeded in righting the diver 
and he inflated his BCD.  He was towed to the shore and given 
AV on the way.  He was recovered from the water, the 
emergency services were called and resuscitation techniques 
were applied using oxygen and an automatic defibrillator.  The 
casualty failed to recover.  The cause of death was found to 
have been through drowning. 
 
May 2005 05/093 
Two divers finished a dive to 20m and were recovered into their 
boat.  One of the pair stated that he had lost a delayed SMB 
and reel on the wreck and wanted to do a 'bounce' dive to 
recover it.  He and his buddy re-entered the water and 
descended.  One of the pair felt a restriction in his regulator 
because he was running low on air.  He signalled to his buddy 
for air but the buddy indicated that he too was running out.  
They both surfaced after about 3 min, 20m apart and in 
distress.  One was tangled in a line and out of air so the boat's 
skipper made for him first and he was recovered into the boat.  
The boat then moved to the second diver but just as they got to 
him he disappeared below the surface.  An extensive search 
was conducted involving two lifeboats, a helicopter and other 
boats.  The diver who had been recovered was taken to hospital 
and treated for shock.  The body of the missing diver was found 
on the seabed six days later. 
May 2005 05/095 
Three divers conducted a dive in a quarry.  They exchanged 
signals to ascend.  One of the three became separated, 
surfaced, got out of the water and waited for his buddies to 
surface.  Two sets of bubbles were seen but these turned out to 
be a different pair of divers.  Later two rebreather divers found 
the two missing divers apparently lifeless at a depth of 34m.  
They were unable to lift the divers so they marked their location 
with delayed SMBs.  The divers were recovered and 
resuscitation techniques were applied.  They were taken to 
hospital where death was confirmed. 
June 2005 05/096 
A diver got into difficulties underwater and was brought to the 
surface.  He was recovered into the boat unconscious and 
resuscitation techniques were applied.  The Coastguard was 
alerted and a nearby warship offered assistance.  The diver was 
recovered onto the warship and from there he was airlifted to 
hospital.  He was pronounced dead on arrival.  It is thought that 
he suffered a heart attack whilst underwater.  (Media reports). 
June 2005 05/102 
A group of four divers dived on a wreck at a maximum depth of 
60m, all using rebreathers with trimix.  Although in the water 
together they conducted their dives separately.  After 60 min, 
one diver was seen by another to be recovering a porthole.  The 
porthole was later found at the surface under the diver's lifting 
bag.  Three divers surfaced having completed over 150 min 
decompression on a trapeze. The diver who had been seen 
with the porthole did not surface and the alarm was raised when 
he was 15 min overdue.  A search was initiated involving two 
lifeboats, two helicopters, a warship and other vessels.  The 
missing diver was not found. 
June 2005 05/135 
A diver conducted a dive on a wreck to a maximum depth of 
68m using a rebreather.  He dived alone although others from 
his party were in the water at the same time.  He was last seen 
hovering motionless above the wreck.  He failed to surface and 
an extensive search involving aircraft was made.  His body has 
not been recovered. 
 
 
©BSAC - 2005  5 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
June 2005 05/136 
A diver entered the water alone.  His body was later spotted, 
motionless, at the surface by a passing fisherman.  The diver 
was recovered by a lifeboat but resuscitation attempts failed. 
July 2005 05/158 
An instructor and two students were engaged in a training 
course to a maximum depth of 28m.  At the end of the dive they 
were ascending the shotline when one of the trainees showed 
some distress and grabbed for the second student's octopus 
regulator.  The instructor's mask was displaced and the second 
student inflated her BCD taking the instructor with her to the 
surface.  The trainee who had the initial problem was seen to 
slip off the shotline and drop from view.  The instructor and 
student who had surfaced were airlifted to a recompression 
facility for precautionary treatment.  An extensive search was 
carried out for the missing diver involving two lifeboats, two 
helicopters and naval and civilian divers but he was not found. 
 
 
 
 
 
BSAC Fatalities against membership 1982-2005 
(UK fatalities only) 
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02
20
04
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
BSAC UK Fatalities     Membership ('000)
 
 
 
 
August 2005 05/187 
A pair of diver were ascending from a dive to a maximum depth 
of 29m.  During the ascent they became separated and one of 
the pair failed to surfaced.  An extensive search involving 
aircraft, surface vessels and divers was conducted but the 
missing diver was not found.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
 
 
 
 
 
August 2005 05/191 
Two divers conducted a buddy check, entered the water and 
commenced their descent.  At about 7m the descent rate of one 
of the divers started to increase.  His buddy followed at a slower 
rated but keeping him in sight.  The first diver hit the bottom at a 
depth of 25m and the second diver settled beside him.  The first 
diver was trying to reconnect his drysuit direct feed hose.  He 
made several unsuccessful attempts and then signalled for his 
buddy to assist.  The buddy also made several unsuccessful 
attempts to reconnect the hose.  Then there was a loud noise 
and the hose began to thrash around filling the water with 
bubbles and reducing visibility.  The heavy diver was able to 
signal 'out of air' and he took his buddy's regulator.  He was 
breathing very heavily and the buddy tried to signal to him to 
calm him and to initiate an ascent.  The buddy tried to stop the 
bubbles by doubling the hose but this did not work.  The buddy 
placed his second regulator in his mouth and took hold of the 
troubled diver.  They started their ascent in a mass of bubbles.  
Suddenly the troubled diver stopped moving and the pair sank 
back to the seabed with the buddy being pulled downwards in a 
position above the other diver.  On the seabed the buddy fully 
inflated his own BCD and they made a rapid ascent to the 
surface.  At the surface the buddy struggled to support the other 
diver, who was not breathing.  He removed both weight 
harnesses and started to give the casualty AV.  He shouted for 
help and another boat came to assist.  The casualty was 
recovered into the boat.  The buddy also got into the boat and 
he and another diver administered oxygen enriched AV and 
CPR to the casualty.  The Coastguard was alerted and the boat 
returned to shore.  Resuscitation techniques were continuously 
applied.  They were met by a doctor and an ambulance.  The 
casualty was declared to be dead.  The buddy was airlifted to a 
recompression facility for precautionary recompression 
treatment.  He suffered no ill effects. 
August 2005 05/203 
A diver surfaced alone from a wreck dive with a maximum depth 
of 30m.  He was seen holding on to his SMB and with his face 
mask removed.  As the boat turned to pick him up he sank 
below the surface and did not reappear.  The Coastguard was 
alerted and an extensive air and sea search was made.  
Underwater searches were also made using sonar and divers.  
The missing diver was not found.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
September 2005 05/214 
A rebreather diver completed an 80 min dive to 46m including 
the following stops; 2 min at 35m, 2 min at 28m, 2 min at 19m, 
5 min at 9m and 25 min at 6m.  During the ascent he felt sick 
and had to switch to his bail out regulator so that he could be 
sick underwater.  He got water in his mask and he swallowed 
this water.  He requested help to get back in the boat and was 
sick again.  He drank some tea and vomited again.  He 
complained of feeling unwell.  He sat down and breathed 
enriched air from his rebreather.  He then became incoherent 
and collapsed.  The Coastguard was alerted and the diver was 
placed on oxygen.  The diver was airlifted to hospital where he 
died four days later. 
 
 
6        ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
Decompression Incidents 
 
October 2004 05/314 
Humber Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI.  
Following a medi-link call RAF rescue helicopter R-131 was 
scrambled airlifting the casualty to recompression chamber for 
treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
October 2004 05/317 
Clyde Coastguard received a call from diver suffering from 
suspected DCI whilst on way to catch a car ferry.  The 
hyperbaric chamber was contacted with Largs Coastguard 
making sure the casualty safely arrived at the chamber.  
(Coastguard report). 
October 2004 05/319 
Shetland Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
requesting assistance for a diver aboard suffering from 
suspected DCI.  Vessel met by ambulance, to recompression 
chamber for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
October 2004 05/320 
Clyde Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having two divers aboard suffering from suspected 
DCI.  Following medical advice, the divers were taken by 
lifeboat to shore where they were transferred to an ambulance 
and transported to hospital for treatment.  (Coastguard & RNLI 
reports). 
November 2004 05/025 
Two divers commenced a dive.  One of the pair had only used a 
drysuit twice before.  At 4m, this diver had difficulty descending 
and the other diver assisted by adding rocks to her BCD.  They 
reached a maximum depth of 25m and then started to ascend.  
17 min into the dive, at a depth of 18m, the BCD inflator valve 
of the diver who had had buoyancy problems stuck and the 
diver became buoyant.  Her buddy came to her assistance and 
they settled onto the seabed.  The inflator valve stuck a second 
time and they were unable to disconnect the hose.  Both divers 
made a rapid, buoyant ascent to the surface.  Their total dive 
time was 22 min.  Once on shore, the diver who had been 
buoyant complained of breathlessness and feeling weak.  The 
buddy was symptom-free.  The Coastguard was alerted and 
medical advice was sought.  The diver was airlifted to a 
recompression chamber for treatment.  Her symptoms were 
fully resolved. 
November 2004 05/026 
A trainee diver who was involved in a drysuit training course 
conducted a 30 min dive to a maximum depth of 6m.  1 hour 
later he dived again.  At 22m he lost control of his buoyancy 
and made a rapid ascent to the surface.  He was placed on 
oxygen for a while.  A day later he experienced problems and 
received recompression treatment for a cerebral DCI. 
November 2004 05/027 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 19m.  One 
of the pair was using nitrox 36, the other was using air.  During 
the dive the nitrox diver suffered a slight loss of buoyancy 
control and ascended 5m. She quickly corrected this problem 
and re-descended.  After 30 min they made their ascent using a 
shotline.  They completed a 5 min stop at 6m and then left the 
water.  Their total dive time was 36 min.  Later that evening the 
nitrox diver began to feel lethargic.  A little later her left arm  
 
started to ache.  She initially thought that it was a muscle strain, 
but the condition worsened.  She breathed from her nitrox 36 
supply and the condition improved.  She sought medical advice 
and travelled to a recompression facility.  On the way her 
condition deteriorated; she developed 'pins and needles' in both 
arms and over the cheek bones in her face, and she had 
difficulty focusing.  She was placed on oxygen.  She received a 
series of three recompression treatments and she was left with 
minor residual symptoms which were considered to have been 
from tissue damage.  She was advised to seek a PFO test. 
November 2004 05/325 
Clyde Coastguard received a call from ambulance control to 
assist at the Helo landing site for Helimed 5 to land a diver 
suffering from suspected DCI for transfer to a recompression 
chamber for treatment.  Casualty was finally transferred by land, 
Cumbrae Coastguard team stood down.  (Coastguard report). 
December 2004 05/326 
Brixham Coastguard maintained a communications watch over 
RAF rescue helicopter as it flew a diver from an inland site to 
DDRC Plymouth for treatment following a dive where he 
developed suspected DCI.  (Coastguard report). 
December 2004 05/029 
A diver was participating in a nitrox training course.  He 
completed a dive to 14m for 23 min with a 5 min stop at 9m and 
a 5 min stop at 6m.  His dive gas was air and he used nitrox 40 
for decompression.  During the decompression stops he 
practiced gas switching.  2 hours 20 min later he dived to 16m 
for 23 min and completed the same decompression process.  
The following day he made an aircraft flight.  1 hour after the 
flight, 15 hours 30 min after his last dive, he developed pains in 
his neck and shoulders and a tingling in his arms and hands.  
These symptoms persisted for three days and he then flew back 
home.  He sought medical advice and was referred to a 
recompression facility.  He received recompression treatment 
and his symptoms resolved.  The following day the symptoms 
returned, he received two further sessions of treatment and his 
symptoms were finally resolved.  He had suffered a previous, 
suspected DCI, four months earlier which had resulted in a 
neck injury and this was thought to have contributed. 
December 2004 05/016 
A diver dived to 39m.  Later the same day he made a second 
dive to a maximum depth of 20m.  Shortly after this second dive 
he complained of chest pains and 'pins and needles' in his legs.  
The diver was placed on oxygen and the Coastguard was 
alerted.  The boat returned to shore and the diver was airlifted 
to a recompression facility.  He received three sessions of 
recompression treatment and was experiencing difficulties 
walking. 
 
December 2004 05/034 
Two pairs of divers conducted a dive together.  One pair waited 
while the second pair moved down to 35m and they then started 
an ascent together, moving up a sloping bottom contour.  At 
24m one of the divers lost control of her drysuit buoyancy and 
started a buoyant ascent.  Her buddy went with her.  The 
second pair also made an ascent.  At 6m they found the buddy 
of the buoyant diver; his computer indicated that a 4 min stop 
was required.  The second pair had less than 1 min 
©BSAC -2005  7 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
decompression and when this had cleared one surfaced and 
the other stayed with the buoyant diver's buddy.  At the surface 
the diver from the second pair found the buoyant diver; her 
computer indicated that a 4 min stop had been missed.  She 
was assisted from the water and placed on oxygen.  After 15 
min she developed pain in her back and legs and started to feel 
nauseous.  The emergency services were alerted and she was 
airlifted to a recompression facility for treatment. 
January 2005 05/036 
Three divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 23m.  At 
20m one of the three experienced a problem with her regulator.  
She attempted to breathe from the alternative air source of one 
of the other divers but couldn't get air.  These two divers made 
a rapid ascent to the surface.  The third diver made a normal 
ascent.  The two who had made the rapid ascent were in 
distress at the surface.  They were recovered from the water 
and placed on oxygen.  The diver who had been out of air was 
airlifted to a recompression facility.  The other two were taken 
by ambulance to hospital.  The diver who had made the normal 
ascent was discharged but the one who had made the rapid 
ascent was transferred to the recompression facility.  Both 
divers who had made the rapid ascent were successfully 
treated.  It was later discovered that the diver who had had 
breathing difficulties had no air in her cylinder and that the pony 
cylinder of the buddy from whom she had attempted to take the 
alternative air source was switched off. 
January 2005 05/046 
A diver conducted a dive to 15m for 21 min with a 3 min stop at 
6m.  4 hours 1 min later she dived to 33m for 24 min including a 
1 min stop at 12m, a 1 min stop at 9m and a 4 min stop at 6m.  
19 hours 7 min later she dived to 21m.  At this depth she 
experienced a 'spinning' sensation.  She signalled to her two 
buddies that she wanted to ascend.  She made a rapid ascent 
to the surface missing a planned stop at 6m.  One buddy came 
with her and the other made a normal ascent.  Her dive duration 
was 2 min 20 sec.  She felt disorientated after the dive.  The 
following day she had a tingling and numbness in her right hand 
and sore elbows and shoulders.  She felt tired and sick and she 
had a headache.  She sought advice from a hyperbaric facility 
and attended for treatment.  DCI was diagnosed and a burst 
eardrum was suspected.  She received two sessions of 
recompression treatment.  Neither buddy suffered any ill effects. 
January 2005 05/048 
Two divers planned a dive to 50m.  At this depth one of the 
divers believes that he experienced nitrogen narcosis.  He 
suggested to his buddy that they descend to 60m which they 
did.  They spent 1 min at 60m and then began their ascent.  
They conducted the following stops - 2 min at 28m, 2 min at 
18m, 2 min at 9m and 23 min at 6m as indicated by their 
computers.  On leaving the water one of the divers experienced 
difficulties.  The emergency services were called and he was 
taken to hospital and then to a recompression facility where he 
was treated for DCI. 
February 2005 05/042 
A diver conducted a 60 min dive to 60m using trimix 19/35.  The 
dive time included a total of 27 min of stops which were made 
at depths between 39 and 6m using nitrox 36 and nitrox 75.  3 
hours later he developed a migraine headache.  He began to 
feel nauseous and to vomit.  He sought medical advice and was 
taken, on oxygen, by ambulance, to a recompression facility.  
He received a 9 hour treatment which fully resolved his 
symptoms. 
 
February 2005 05/051 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 20m.  At 
this depth one of the pair wanted to cough and he removed his 
regulator to do so.  The regulator then began to free flow.  He 
attempted to use his pony regulator and his buddy turned his 
main air supply off and then on again, which stopped the free 
flow.  The diver then reached for his inflation unit.  His buddy 
thought that he was about to make a rapid ascent and she 
managed to control him.  They made a normal ascent to 15m 
but at this point the ascent rate began to rise.  The panicked 
diver made a rapid ascent from 10m to the surface.  His dive 
duration was 14 min.  His buddy made a normal ascent.  20 min 
later, the diver who had made the rapid ascent started to feel 
pain in his hip and knee, and a tingling in his hand.  He had had 
a headache prior to the dive and had taken Panadol.  He was 
placed on oxygen.  His condition did not improve and he was 
taken by helicopter to a recompression facility where he 
received recompression treatment.  He was discharged the 
following day. 
February 2005 05/061 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 35m.  
They started their ascent and, at a depth of 30m, the fin of one 
of the divers came off.  This caused him to lose control of his 
buoyancy.  At 20m he removed his weightbelt and managed to 
control his ascent to about 12m.  At this point he lost buoyancy 
control and made a fast ascent to the surface. His dive duration 
was 18 min.   Later he experienced a tingling in his right thigh.  
He was placed on oxygen which initially improved his 
symptoms.  He then developed a problem with his right 
shoulder.  An ambulance was called and the diver was airlifted 
to a recompression chamber for treatment.  He is believed to 
have made a full recovery. 
February 2005 05/062 
Two divers completed a 27 min dive to 20m with a 3 min 
decompression stop at 5m.  During the last few minutes of the 
dive one of the pair began to feel cold.  Shortly after leaving the 
water, she started to feel dizzy.  Her buddy helped her to 
remove her kit and she was placed in the recovery position.  
She was very cold and disorientated.  She was placed on 
oxygen and wrapped up to prevent further heat loss.  She was 
taken by ambulance to hospital and from there to a 
recompression facility where she received three sessions of 
treatment.  She made a full recovery. 
March 2005 05/078 
A diver suffering from DCI was airlifted to a recompression 
facility.  (Media report). 
March 2005 05/080 
A diver conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 43m for a 
duration of 18 min including a 2 min stop at 6m.  After a surface 
interval of 2 hours 12 min he dived to 30m for 27 min including 
a 1 min stop at 5m. Back on the boat the diver complained of a 
lower back pain; he thought that he had strained a muscle 
climbing the ladder.  The pain worsened and he was placed on 
oxygen.  The Coastguard was alerted.  5 min later the casualty 
had lost feeling in the top of his right leg.  The casualty was 
airlifted to a recompression facility for treatment and released 
the following day. 
March 2005 05/288 
A diver conducted a dive to 14m.  4 hours 30 min later she 
dived to 14m for 27 min with a 1 min safety stop at 3m.  19 
hours later she dived to 22m.  After about 13 min she felt air 
migrate into the feet of her drysuit and then her right foot was 
pulled from the boot.  Shortly afterwards the same thing 
8        ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
happened to her left foot.  She then lost control of her buoyancy 
and made a rapid ascent to the surface hitting the underside of 
the boat.  Her buddy made a normal ascent.  The buoyant diver 
was recovered into the boat.  She complained of pain in her 
right shoulder and nausea.  She was placed on oxygen and the 
Coastguard was alerted.  She was airlifted to a recompression 
facility where she was treated for a suspected neurological DCI.  
She was discharged later that night. 
April 2005 05/342 
Brixham Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI, the 
casualty was airlifted by Coastguard rescue helicopter to 
recompression chamber for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
April 2005 05/345 
Solent Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI.  
The casualty was airlifted by Coastguard helicopter to QAH for 
treatment, the incident also attended by Littlehampton and 
Portsmouth Coastguard teams.  (Coastguard report). 
 
 
 
 
Decompression incidents by month 
 
O
ct
. '
04
N
ov
.
D
ec
.
Ja
n.
 '0
5
Fe
b.
M
ar
.
A
pr
.
M
ay
Ju
ne
Ju
ly
A
ug
.
Se
pt
.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
 
April 2005 05/111 
A diver and an instructor descended to a depth of 30m.  The 
diver indicated that he was unhappy and they started to ascend.  
During the ascent the diver lost his regulator and made a very 
rapid ascent to the surface.  His dive duration was 9 min.  He 
was recovered from the water.  He lost consciousness, had a 
weak pulse and his pupils were unresponsive.  He was placed 
on oxygen and airlifted to a recompression facility.  He received 
recompression treatment for DCI and was released, fully 
recovered, later the same day. 
April 2005 05/215 
A diver completed a 34 min dive to 28m followed, 5 hours 12 
min later, by a 30 min dive to 17m.  The following day he dived 
to 22m for 33 min with a 2 min safety stop at 6m.  About 12 
hours later he noticed itching and 'pins and needles' down his 
back.  During the night the condition worsened and spread 
across his back.  The next morning he sought medical advice 
and received recompression treatment that resolved his 
symptoms.  Repetitive diving and dehydration were thought to 
have been contributory factors. 
April 2005 05/112 
An instructor and a trainee conducted a 40 min dive to 17m.  16 
hours later they dived to a maximum depth of 17m.  Towards 
the end of the dive, the instructor demonstrated the deployment 
of a delayed SMB.  During deployment the reel jammed and the 
regulator being used for fill the SMB started to free flow.  Before 
he could release the reel the instructor was dragged upwards.  
The trainee hung on to the instructor and both started to 
ascend.  The trainee then let go of the instructor but both were 
carried buoyantly to the surface.  Their dive duration was 40 
min.  Both were recovered into their boat and placed on oxygen.  
Shortly afterwards the trainee began to complain of visual 
disturbances.  The Coastguard was alerted and the divers were 
airlifted to a recompression facility where they both received 
treatment.  Both made a full recovery. 
April 2005 05/257 
A diver conducted a 32 min dive to a depth of 27m with a 1 min 
stop at 6m.  4 hours later he dived to 28m for 48 min with an 8 
min stop at 6m using nitrox 50.  Shortly after the second dive he 
felt a pain in his elbow.  He was placed on oxygen for 10 min, 
switched to nitrox 50 for 10 min, back to oxygen for 20 min until 
it ran out, then back to nitrox 50.  The diver had no other 
symptoms of DCI.  Medical advice was sought and it was 
determined that there was a lifeboat in the area with another 
diver with DCI and a doctor on board.  The lifeboat was tasked 
to collect the diver who was placed on oxygen and taken 
ashore.  He was taken to a recompression facility.  His 
symptoms had resolved.  It was decided that he should receive 
precautionary recompression treatment with the other diver who 
had been on the lifeboat.  He experienced no further problems. 
May 2005 05/259 
A diver dived to 14m for 30 min with a 2 min stop at 6m.  2 
hours later she dived to 14m again.  After 20 min she became 
cold and the diver and her buddy decided to terminate the dive.  
The buddy settled on the seabed and prepared a delayed SMB.  
While he did so the other diver started to rise to the surface.  
When the buddy realised that she had started her ascent he 
made himself buoyant to catch her up.  By the time he caught 
up with her and had controlled their buoyancy they were at the 
surface.  Two days later the diver complained of 'pins and 
needles' in her fingers and joint pains.  Medical advice was 
sought and the diver was taken to a recompression facility.  She 
received two sessions of recompression therapy and her 
symptoms were fully resolved. 
May 2005 05/123 
A pair of divers dived to 30m.  One of the pair began to feel very 
uncomfortable and indicated that she wanted to ascend.  She 
then began a rapid ascent; her buddy followed.  Their dive 
duration was 23 min.  At the surface the diver who had started 
the rapid ascent felt unwell and was placed on oxygen.  Her 
condition worsened and the emergency services were alerted.  
She was airlifted to a recompression facility.  Later her buddy 
also began to feel unwell and he made his own way to the 
recompression facility.  Both divers received two sessions of 
recompression treatment for DCI. 
 
May 2005 05/355 
Dive support vessel reported having two divers aboard suffering 
from suspected DCI following a rapid ascent 16m after a dive to 
32m.  Both divers taken to DDRC for treatment.  (Coastguard 
report). 
 
 
©BSAC -2005  9 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
May 2005 05/091 
Two divers descended a shotline to a wreck.  They swam to the 
end of the shotline to tie a lifting bag to the grapple to aid 
recovery.  Visibility and light levels were low due to plankton.  
They reached a maximum depth of 32m.  The lead diver then 
became tangled in mono-filament fishing net and lines that were 
covering part of the wreck.  He was unable to free himself and 
started to panic.  His buddy came to his aid and was eventually 
able to cut him free.  The diver had been trapped for 12 min.  
He had inflated his BCD and drysuit whilst trapped and once 
free he started a buoyant ascent.  He was able to slow the 
ascent at 20m.  He looked for his buddy but could not see him.  
He then made a normal ascent with a safety stop at 3m.  The 
buddy had also become tangled in the lines and was unable to 
free himself so he removed his diving cylinders and after 
inflating his drysuit, he made a free ascent directly to the 
surface, where he arrived before his buddy.  At the surface he 
was able to give an emergency signal and he was recovered 
into a boat.  He was semiconscious.  He was placed on oxygen 
and the Coastguard alerted.  The buddy surfaced safely a few 
minutes later.  Both divers were airlifted to a recompression 
facility where treatment for DCI was given. 
May 2005 05/354 
Dive support vessel reported having a diver aboard suffering 
from suspected DCI following a dive to 32m.  Casualty and 
buddy airlifted to DDRC for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2005 05/122 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 27m.  
They started their ascent and, at a depth of 25m, one of the pair 
attempted to release air from his drysuit but was unable to 
prevent a rapid ascent.  He was able to stop at 3m for 2 min but 
then he surfaced.  His dive duration was 27 min.  His buddy 
made a normal ascent.  The buoyant diver was recovered from 
the water and placed on oxygen and the Coastguard was 
alerted.  Once ashore he was taken by ambulance to a 
recompression facility where he was treated for DCI. 
May 2005 05/129 
A diver conducted a 30 min dive to a depth of 18m using nitrox 
34.  One hour later he developed a pain in his forehead, vision 
problems and a tightness in his chest.  He was placed on 
oxygen and transferred by helicopter to a recompression facility 
where he was treated for suspected DCI. 
May 2005 05/133 
A diver conducted a 40 min dive to a maximum depth of 25m 
with a 3 min safety stop at 6m.  2 hours 11 min later she dived 
to a maximum depth of 25m.  During this dive she began to feel 
buoyant as she swam up a slope.  She tried to dump air from 
her cuff dump and a few bubbles came out.  She soon felt 
buoyant again and she removed her drysuit direct feed hose in 
case the inflation valve had become jammed.  She again 
dumped a little air from her cuff dump.  She checked to make 
sure her BCD was empty which it was.  She and her buddy 
decided to abort the dive.  The buddy deployed a delayed SMB 
and they started their ascent.  The buoyant diver was unable to 
control her ascent and rose, at an increasingly fast rate, to the 
surface.  She was recovered into the boat and placed on 
oxygen.  Her buddy made a normal ascent including safety 
stops.  As the boat neared the shore the diver who had made 
the rapid ascent began to feel a slight tingling sensation in her 
left hand and arm.  The Coastguard was alerted and the diver 
was airlifted to a recompression facility.  Recompression 
treatment did not resolve the symptoms.  The symptoms 
resolved, in hospital, overnight and the diver was released the 
following day after a second recompression treatment.  It is 
thought that the diver's undersuit blocked the dump valve. 
May 2005 05/359 
Dive support vessel contacted Stornoway Coastguard reporting 
having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI.  A medi-
link call was established.  Coastguard rescue helicopter R-MU 
was scrambled to airlift casualty to a recompression chamber 
for treatment, being met by Oban Coastguard team and a 
waiting ambulance.  (Coastguard report). 
 
May 2005 05/362 
Dive support vessel contacted Portland Coastguard reporting 
having two divers aboard who had made a rapid ascent and 
were suffering from suspected DCI.  The divers were airlifted 
from the vessel and transferred to a waiting ambulance by 
Poole Coastguard rescue team for onward transportation to 
recompression chamber for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2005 05/369 
Dive support vessel contacted Portland Coastguard by 
telephone reporting having a diver aboard having made a rapid 
ascent and was showing signs of DCI.  Rescue helicopter R-
WB was tasked to airlift the casualty and buddy from the vessel 
to a recompression chamber for treatment, Poole Coastguard 
manned the HLS.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2005 05/372 
Dive support vessel called Falmouth Coastguard on VHF 
reporting having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI 
following a dive to 36m.  Falmouth Coastguard tasked RN 
rescue R-193 and Penzance Coastguard team, the casualty 
and buddy were airlifted to DDRC Plymouth.  (Coastguard 
report). 
May 2005 05/373 
Dive support vessel called Portland Coastguard reporting 
having a diver aboard with suspected DCI, medical advice had 
already been sought and the doctor had recommended 
evacuation.  Portland Coastguard tasked Coastguard rescue 
helicopter R-WB to airlift the casualty to a recompression 
chamber for treatment. the HLS was manned by Poole 
Coastguard team.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2005 05/146 
30 min after a 21 min dive a diver complained of soreness and 
numbness on his right hand side.  He was placed on oxygen 
and the Coastguard was alerted.  A lifeboat was launched to 
assist.  (Coastguard  & RNLI reports). 
May 2005 05/228 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 30m.  After 
25 min both divers prepared to ascend.  One of the pair 
deployed a delayed SMB and they started their ascent after 28 
min.  The diver with the SMB lost control of his buoyancy and 
ascended quickly to the surface.  The other diver managed to 
complete 6 min of stops between 6 and 3m, but had exceeded 
the recommended ascent rate.  The first diver was recovered 
into the boat and placed on oxygen.  The Coastguard was 
alerted and once other divers had been recovered the boat 
returned to shore.  The first diver was taken by ambulance to a 
recompression facility where he was treated twice for DCI.  It 
was later found that weight was missing from the integrated 
weight system of his BCD.  It is thought that this had been lost 
during the dive, leading to his rapid ascent. 
 
 
10        ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
June 2005 05/374 
Dive support vessel contacted Portland Coastguard on VHF 
channel 16 reporting having a diver aboard suffering from a skin 
rash, the dive support vessel had medical advice which 
recommended an airlift to recompression chamber.  Coastguard 
helicopter R-WB was tasked to evacuate the diver.  The 
helicopter was met by a doctor and Poole Coastguard for 
transportation by ambulance to the recompression chamber.  
(Coastguard report). 
June 2005 05/376 
Stornoway Coastguard received a call from a diver who was 
experiencing problem associated with DCI following a dive to 
22m, the diver was airlifted to recompression chamber by 
Coastguard rescue helicopter R-MU, with Broadford & Portree 
Coastguard teams assisting.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2005 05/137 
Dive support vessel contacted Stornoway Coastguard reporting 
having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI.  
Coastguard rescue helicopter R-MU was tasked to airlift the 
casualty to recompression chamber for treatment.  (Coastguard 
report). 
June 2005 05/378 
Brixham Coastguard received a call from a diver reporting one 
of the party was suffering from suspected DCI following a dive 
to  34m.  Casualty was met by ambulance and Hope Cove 
Coastguard then airlifted by RAF rescue helicopter R-169 to 
DDRC Plymouth for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2005 05/381 
Dive support vessel reported having a diver on shore who was 
feeling dizzy and having had problems clearing ears following a 
dive to 34m, the diver was airlifted to DDRC Plymouth for 
treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2005 05/377 
Clyde Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard who had made a rapid ascent to 
the surface following loss of weigh belt, the casualty was 
transferred to hospital and later on to hyperbaric chamber for 
treatment for DCI.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
June 2005 05/153 
A diver conducted a dive to 31m for 40 min with a 3 min safety 
stop at 6m.  1 hour 47 min later he dived to 22m for 40 min with 
a 3 min safety stop at 6m.  Once back on the boat the diver felt 
as if he had pulled a muscle in his arm.  Later that evening the 
pain got much worse and he sought advice from a 
recompression facility.  A 'mixed neurological and limb' DCI was 
diagnosed.   He received a series of four recompression 
treatments over the next three days.  He was left with some 
numbness in his elbow and has followed advice to stop diving. 
June 2005 05/383 
Forth Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI, 
following a dive to 23m when a rapid ascent was made during 
the ascent from 14m. The casualty was met by ambulance and 
Eyemouth Coastguard, casualty was assessed and it was 
decided to airlift the patient to recompression chamber by Heli-
med rescue helicopter.  (Coastguard report). 
 
June 2005 05/160 
A diver conducted a 24 min dive to a depth of 5m.  41 min later 
he dived to 35m.  During this second dive he ascended to 25m 
and then re-descended to 35m.  He then rose to 22m from 
where he ascended to the surface in 2 min.  Once out of the 
water he complained of feeling unwell and he had backache.  
He was placed on oxygen and taken to hospital from where he 
was discharged during the night.  He awoke the following 
morning feeling unwell, unable to walk and with urinary 
retention.  He went to hospital and from there to a 
recompression facility where he received extensive treatment 
over a period of twelve days. 
June 2005 05/391 
Solent Coastguard received a call from dive boat reporting 
having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI, the 
casualty was taken to QAH by ambulance for treatment.  
(Coastguard report). 
June 2005 05/388 
Falmouth Coastguard received a 'Mayday' call on VHF channel 
16 reporting a diver onboard suffering from suspected DCI 
following a rapid ascent from 65m, missing 45min of stops.  
Falmouth Coastguard tasked RN rescue helicopter R-193 to 
airlift the casualty to DDRC Plymouth.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2005 05/166 
A diver completed a dive to 23m for 40 min with a 3 min stop at 
6m.  5 hours 35 min later he dived to 13m for 34 min with a 3 
min stop at 6m.  16 hours 35 min later he dived to 20m for 42 
min with a 2 min stop at 15m and a 3 min stop at 6m.  He was 
woken early the following morning by a dull pain in his right 
shoulder.  He took a pain killer and went back to bed.  He woke 
later with a pronounced pain in his right shoulder and a slight 
pain in his right elbow.  He also had a weakness in his right 
hand and decreased reflexes in his right arm.  His pain 
improved when he breathed nitrox 50.  He sought medical 
advice and was diagnosed with a neurological DCI.  He 
received two sessions of recompression treatment. 
June 2005 05/167 
A rebreather diver suffered paralysis in both legs.  She received 
recompression treatment. 
June 2005 05/188 
Three divers entered the water and commenced their descent 
down a shotline.  One diver moved ahead of the others.  At 22m 
he realised that the other two were not following him and he re-
ascended to meet them at about 10m.  One of the other divers 
then started to descend when the third diver indicated that he 
was having problems clearing his ears and was going to abort 
the dive.  This diver ascended on his own and the other two 
continued the dive.  They met on the bottom at a depth of 26m.  
They swam to a wreck at a maximum depth of 28m.  One of the 
pair experienced buoyancy control problems and held on to the 
wreck on occasions trying to dump air from his suit.  They 
deployed a delayed SMB to make their ascent and whilst doing 
so the buoyant diver lost control and was carried to the surface.  
The buoyant diver's SMB had a small weight attached and he 
felt that the loss of this weight which he sent up with the buoy 
caused him to finally lose control of his buoyancy.  He was 
recovered into the boat and placed on oxygen.  His buddy 
ascended as fast as his computer would allow.  The Coastguard 
was alerted and the boat returned to shore.  The diver who had 
made the rapid ascent was taken by ambulance and helicopter 
to a recompression facility for treatment for DCI. 
©BSAC -2005  11 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
June 2005 05/168 
A diver using nitrox 30 completed a 36 min dive to 36m 
including a 5 min stop at 6m and a 1 min stop at 3m.  Shortly 
after re-boarding the boat he complained of an ache in his left 
shoulder.  This persisted and he was placed on oxygen.  He 
had a blotchy red rash on his shoulder which faded when the 
oxygen was administered.  Medical advice was sought and the 
Coastguard was contacted.  The diver was airlifted to a 
recompression facility.  He received treatment that resolved his 
symptoms.  His buddy suffered no ill effects. 
July 2005 05/308 
Three divers descended a shotline and conducted a dive to a 
maximum depth of 33m.  After 17 min they began to re-ascend, 
back up the shotline.  They completed a safety stop at 6m and 
then surfaced.  Their dive duration was 28 min of which 11 min 
was the ascent.  The following day one of the three developed a 
headache and began to feel nauseous. During the night he 
awoke suddenly with his head pounding.  He went back to 
sleep.  When he awoke in the morning his headache was still 
there and he began to develop a slight tingling in his right arm 
and waves of dizziness.  He sought medical advice, saw his 
doctor and was taken to hospital.  The diver was starting to feel 
very confused and had muscle fatigue.  The doctors rejected 
his suggestions that he might be suffering from DCI and he was 
given analgesic drugs.  He was kept in hospital overnight and 
the following day his wife rang a recompression facility and 
sought diving medical advice.  They advised that he attend a 
recompression facility, which he did.  He received three 
sessions of recompression treatment for DCI and made a full 
recovery. 
July 2005 05/406 
Portland Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI, 
the casualty was airlifted from the vessel by Coastguard rescue 
helicopter R-WB and taken to Poole HLS to be met by Poole 
Coastguard and a waiting ambulance for transportation to 
recompression chamber.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/408 
Portland Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI, 
Coastguard rescue helicopter was scrambled airlifting the 
casualty to Poole HLS where they were met by Poole 
Coastguard and an ambulance for transportation to 
recompression chamber,  (Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/189 
A diver conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 32m using 
nitrox 34.  He started his ascent after 32 min and took 8 min to 
rise to 6m.  At this depth he completed a 10 min stop and then 
took a further 2 min to reach the surface.  40 min after the dive 
he felt one ear clear and became dizzy.  He refrained from 
further diving.  Once back on shore he found that he was 
unable to walk properly.  He was placed on oxygen and 
specialised medical advice was sought.  He went to hospital 
and from there to a recompression facility.  He received two 
recompression treatments.  He was diagnosed with a possible 
DCI of the inner ear.  Dehydration and heavy exercise before 
the dive were cited as potential exacerbating factors.  He was 
later passed fit to recommence diving. 
July 2005 05/413 
Brixham Coastguard tasked RN rescue helicopter R -193 to 
airlift a diver suffering from suspected DCI after dive to 66m, 
casualty was flown to DDRC Plymouth.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/180 
A diver dived to 31m for 33 min.  2 hours 30 min later he dived 
to 15m for 33 min.  The following day, 18 hours later, he dived, 
with two others, to a depth of 36m for 27 min with a 4 min stop 
at 6m.  Shortly after getting back into the boat this diver was 
found to be dizzy and disorientated and he had a numbness in 
his right hand and leg.  He was placed on oxygen and the 
Coastguard was informed.  The diver's condition improved.  He 
was airlifted to a recompression facility where he was treated 
for DCI. 
July 2005 05/417 
Dover Coastguard received a call from a dive boat reporting 
having two divers aboard suffering from suspected DCI 
following a dive to 25m, a medi-link call was established, the 
doctor recommended immediate evacuation by lifeboat, both 
divers taken by ambulance to Whipps Cross Hospital for 
treatment.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
July 2005 05/217 
Two divers surfaced having missed a 1 min stop.  One of the 
pair developed symptoms of DCI and was airlifted to a 
recompression facility where she was treated for a serious 
spinal DCI. 
July 2005 05/420 
Humber Coastguard received a call from a dive support vessel 
indicating a diver with suspected DCI following a dive to 20m, 
the diver reported buoyancy problems causing him to ascend 
too fast at the end of the dive, the diver was airlifted by RAF 
rescue helicopter R-131 and transferred to hyperbaric chamber 
for treatment, Hull Coastguard prepared the HLS.  (Coastguard 
& RNLI reports). 
July 2005 05/299 
Two divers conducted a dive to a depth of 60m using trimix.  
After 25 min they started their ascent.  Both deployed delayed 
SMBs.  One of the divers then abandoned his SMB and 
dropped back down onto the other diver and gave the 'out of air' 
signal.  The other diver gave him his alternative air source and 
assisted him to 30m.  The assisting diver switched to his nitrox 
40 supply and indicated that the troubled diver should do the 
same.  When he did so he inhaled some water and he then 
inflated his BCD and made a buoyant ascent to the surface.  
The abandoned SMB line was tangled around both divers and 
the other diver was dragged upwards.  He managed to cut 
himself free and regain control of his ascent.  The buoyant diver 
arrived at the surface in a panic.  He was assisted into the boat.  
The other diver's SMB line had become tangled around the 
panicked diver and this was cut at the surface.  The panicked 
diver was airlifted to a recompression facility and discharged 
after a precautionary treatment.  The buddy discovered that his 
SMB had been cut and then deployed a small lifting bag as an 
SMB.  He completed all his required stops and surfaced.  4 
hours later he felt a pain in his lower back.  The following 
morning his symptoms had worsened and he attended a 
recompression facility.  He received a series of recompression 
treatments for a spinal DCI and had residual loss of sensation 
in his lower body. 
July 2005 05/422 
Liverpool Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI, 
the vessel was met by an ambulance and taken to hyperbaric 
chamber.  (Coastguard report). 
 
12        ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
July 2005 05/263 
A diver dived to 36m for 30 min with a 2 min stop at 6m.  19 
hours 14 min later he dived to a maximum depth of 43m.  For 
this second dive he was using a twin set in which one cylinder 
contained air and the other about 10% helium.  Each cylinder 
had its own regulator.  The dive initially planned was relatively 
shallow and the divers' dive planning information suggested that 
the helium could be treated just like nitrogen.  However the dive 
plan was changed at short notice, because of the weather, and 
the diver neglected to reconsider his use of helium.  He started 
the dive using the cylinder containing air and switched to the 
one containing helium when the contents gauge read 100 bar.  
He estimates this to have been 10 min into the dive at a depth 
of 36m.  He left maximum depth after 20 min, ascended to 31m, 
and then deployed a delayed SMB.  He ascended to 9m and 
6m where he conducted a 1 min safety stop.  At 3m his 
computer indicated that a stop was required.  During this stop 
he felt an ache in his lower back.  Then he felt a warm feeling 
spreading down his legs.  He concluded that he had a spinal 
DCI.  He switched back to the air cylinder. He completed an 18 
min stop at 3m and surfaced.  He was able to get back into the 
boat but unable to stand once in the boat.  He was given fluids 
and placed on oxygen.  The boat returned to shore and the 
diver was taken by ambulance to hospital.  He was then airlifted 
to a recompression facility.  He received seventeen sessions of 
recompression therapy over a three week period.  After this he 
was able to walk unaided but was left with altered sensation 
below the waist. 
July 2005 05/155 
Two pairs of divers entered the water and conducted a 39 min 
dive to a maximum depth of 33m with safety stops at 9 and 6m.  
One of the group felt anxious in the water and she struggled to 
get back into the boat at the end of the dive.  Back in the boat 
she felt faint and nauseous.  She continued to feel unwell and 
refrained from further diving that day.  Over the next two days 
her condition deteriorated and she developed a very severe 
pain in her shoulder.  She was being treated for a previous 
shoulder injury.  Three days later she sought advice from a 
recompression facility and received recompression treatment 
which resolved her symptoms. 
July 2005 05/424 
Liverpool Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard suffering from a severe 
headache following a dive to 27m, the diver was given oxygen 
and requested medical advice.  The vessel was met by 
ambulance and taken to hyperbaric chamber for treatment.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/423 
Shetland Coastguard received a call from a dive boat reporting 
having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI, at arrival in 
harbour the casualty and buddy were transferred to a waiting 
ambulance and transported to hospital for treatment.  
(Coastguard report). 
 
July 2005 05/425 
Humber Coastguard received a call from dive boat reporting 
having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI following a 
rapid ascent from 26m, the diver was in a threesome diving 
down a shotline when an un-equalised ear forced the diver to 
abort, ascending the shot alone and being recovered to the dive 
boat.  Some short time later the diver felt better and attempted 
to rejoin the other pair at 26m, the diver forgot ankle weights 
and whilst attempting to descend by pulling down the shotline, 
the diver lost buoyancy control and made a feet first buoyant 
ascent, the boat party entered the water removing gear and 
recovered to the boat, no oxygen was on the boat.  The diver 
was airlifted by RAF rescue helicopter R-128 to a 
recompression chamber for treatment, the aircraft was met by 
Hull Coastguard and a waiting ambulance.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/428 
Portland Coastguard received a call from a dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI 
followed a rapid ascent from 22m, the casualty was airlifted 
from the vessel by Coastguard rescue helicopter R.IJ, the 
helicopter was met by Poole Coastguard who prepared the 
HLS, the casualty was taken to Poole recompression chamber 
by ambulance.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/426 
Two divers were airlifted from a dive support vessel, one 
complaining of suspected symptoms of DCI, it is believed that 
one diver may have had a buoyancy problem and made a rapid 
ascent from 22m. The divers were met by Poole Coastguard 
and an ambulance at the HLS for transportation to 
recompression chamber.  (Coastguard report). 
 
 
 
Percentage analysis of factors involved in 
cases of DCI 
 
0 10 20
Percentage Occurrence
30
Rapid Ascent  
Dive >30m  
Repeat Dives  
Within Limits  
Misuse/Missed
stops  
 
 
July 2005 05/207 
A diver dived to 32m for 38 min.  2 hours 54 min later he dived 
to 25m for 34 min.  The following day he dived to 45m for 32 
min and 2 hours 30 min later to 18m for 48 min.  The following 
day he dived to 43m for 36 min and 2 hours 29 min later to 21m 
for 44 min.  After the penultimate dive he noticed a 'twinge' in 
his upper right arm, but put this down to lifting a heavy weight.  
After the last dive he noticed a dull pain in his right upper arm.  
When driving home, after the last dive, the pain in his arm 
worsened.  He sought medical advice and was advised to visit a 
recompression facility.  He received three sessions of 
recompression treatment which eased the pain. 
July 2005 05/300 
Two divers conducted a dive to a depth of 37m.  One of the 
divers deployed a delayed SMB to make their ascent.  The reel 
jammed and dragged the diver upwards.  He let go of the reel 
but was unable to stop the ascent.  His buddy held on to him 
until 10m.  The buoyant diver rose straight to the surface.  The 
other diver completed a safety stop at 3m and then ascended to 
the surface.  10 min after surfacing the diver who had made the 
©BSAC -2005  13 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
rapid ascent noticed a pain in his wrist and lower arm.  He was 
placed on oxygen and the Coastguard was alerted.  Both divers 
were airlifted to a recompression facility.  The diver with 
symptoms was recompressed and his symptoms were resolved. 
July 2005 05/185 
The Coastguard was alerted when a diver developed DCI.  He 
was brought ashore by lifeboat and taken to a recompression 
facility for treatment.  (Media report). 
July 2005 05/201 
A group of six divers were conducting a dive to a depth of 22m.  
One of the divers passed through a thermocline.  This 
disorientated her and caused her to panic.  She made a rapid 
ascent to the surface and the others went with her.  Their dive 
time was 20 min.  Once out of the water the diver was found to 
be in severe shock.  She was placed on oxygen and the 
emergency services were alerted.  She was taken to hospital 
and diving medical advice was sought.  She was taken to a 
recompression facility and staff at the facility requested to see 
all those involved.  Four members of the group were found to 
have symptoms of DCI and all four received recompression 
treatment. 
August 2005 05/303 
Two divers conducted a dive to 20m for 43 min with a 1 min 
stop at 3m.  2 hours 45 min later they dived to 16m for 49 min 
with a 1 min stop at 3m.  18 hours 23 min later they conducted 
a dive to a depth of 27m.  They planned for a no-stop dive using 
their computers.  After 29 min they started their ascent and one 
of the divers noticed that his computer was indicating that a 
decompression stop was necessary.  They believe that they 
had been affected by nitrogen narcosis.  They ascended to 3m 
and made the stop.  Their computer cleared after 1 min but they 
followed their back up plan and completed a 5 min stop.  2 
hours after the dive one of the divers felt a numbness in his 
arm.  Medical advice was sought.  The diver was placed on 
oxygen and taken to a recompression facility.  Medical 
examination suggested a DCI in his arm and he received two 
sessions of recompression therapy.  Two days prior to the dive 
he had pulled a muscle in his arm and it was thought that this 
had contributed to the problem. 
August 2005 05/186 
A diver suffered DCI after a dive to 52m.  He was airlifted to a 
recompression facility for treatment.  (Media report). 
August 2005 05/231 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 33m using 
nitrox 32.  Towards the end of the dive one of the pair deployed 
a delayed SMB and they started their ascent.  The diver with 
the SMB stopped at 5m to conduct a 3 min safety stop but the 
other diver, who had lost control of her buoyancy at around 
10m, made a rapid ascent directly to the surface.  Her dive 
duration was 30 min.  The divers could see each other and the 
diver with the SMB signalled for the buoyant diver to wait at the 
surface for him.  They were recovered into their boat.  Neither 
diver reported the rapid ascent.  The diver who had made the 
rapid ascent complained of a headache and of feeling sick.  
She vomited.  The boat returned to shore and the diver stated 
that she still felt unwell and was advised to seek medical 
advice.  The following day she still felt unwell and she went to a 
recompression facility.  A cerebral DCI as the result of an 
embolism was diagnosed.  The diver received a course of 
thirteen recompression treatments over a fifteen day period.  
She made a good recovery. 
August 2005 05/232 
A diver conducted a 32 min dive to a depth of 34m.  The 
following day she dived to 33m for 30 min with a 2 min stop at 
3m.  She was using nitrox 27.  She later experienced symptoms 
of DCI.  It is thought that some exertion following the dive and 
dehydration may have been contributing factors. 
August 2005 05/440 
Dive support vessel contacted Stornoway Coastguard reporting 
having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI, a medi-link 
call was established with ARI, Coastguard helicopter R-MU was 
scrambled to airlift the casualty to recompression chamber for 
treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/235 
A diver completed a 30 min dive to 31m with a 3 min safety stop 
at 6m.  2 hours 50 min later he dived to 23m for 55 min with a 3 
min stop at 6m.  90 min after the last dive he noticed a 
significant itchiness of his upper left arm.  The Coastguard was 
alerted and the diver was given fluids and placed on oxygen.  
He was then taken to a recompression facility where he 
received recompression treatment.  His symptoms were 
resolved.  He was advised to seek examination for a PFO. 
August 2005 05/443 
Portland Coastguard received a call from a dive vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI, 
the casualty was airlifted from the vessel by Coastguard rescue 
helicopter R-VA and the aircraft was met by an ambulance, 
doctor and Poole Coastguard.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/444 
Portland Coastguard received a call from dive boat reporting 
having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI after 
becoming entangled in netting and surfacing without stopping.  
The casualty lost contact with his buddy who then became 
entangled in netting, the diver attempted to release his delayed 
SMB but this compounded the problem, the diver panicked 
making a rapid ascent from 29m.  The diver was airlifted by 
Coastguard rescue helicopter R-WB to Poole HLS where he 
was met by an ambulance, doctor, and Poole Coastguard, the 
dive boat was met by Westbay Coastguard.  (Coastguard 
report). 
August 2005 05/237 
A diver conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 9m.  Towards 
the end of the dive he was swimming back up a sloping seabed.  
At 5m he was lifted by swell and this caused him to make an 
uncontrolled ascent to the surface.  His dive duration was 32 
min.  2 hours 20 min later he dived to 9m for 32 min.  The 
following day the diver sought advice from a recompression 
facility and was treated for a neurological DCI. 
August 2005 05/236 
Two divers conducted a 29 min dive to 43m including a 5 min 
stop at 7m and a 3 min stop at 3m.  2 hours 30 min later they 
dived to 27m for 41 min including a 5 min stop at 6m and a 4 
min stop at 3m.  After this second dive one diver noticed a pain 
in his right shoulder and the other a pain in her left arm.  Both 
put this down to muscle strain whilst climbing back into the 
boat.   The first diver's shoulder pain increased and he 
developed a rash and swelling to his right bicep and over his 
collar bone to the centre of his back.  He went to a 
recompression facility and was treated for DCI.  The second 
diver's condition also worsened and, about 24 hours after the 
dive, her arm felt 'solid, hot, sore and scratchy'.  The following 
day she too went to the recompression facility and joined her 
14        ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
buddy for his second recompression treatment.  No further 
treatment was required.  One of the divers was subsequently 
checked for a PFO but none was found. 
August 2005 05/238 
A diver conducted a 28 min dive to 30m including a 3 min stop 
at 6m.  1 hour 40 min later he dived to 17m for 51 min with a 1 
min stop at 6m.  After this dive he felt a pain to the left side of 
his stomach and found that he had a bruise that felt sore.  He 
discussed this with his dive buddy and they concluded that part 
of his dive equipment may have been responsible.  Later, whilst 
unloading the boat, he felt a sharp pain in his chest when he 
breathed.  He then felt nauseous and developed a headache.  
He thought that it was the onset of migraine and took some pain 
killers.  The mark on his stomach spread and his breathing was 
still causing him problems.  On the way home he was taken to a 
hospital and then on to another hospital by ambulance.  He was 
given oxygen which improved his condition.  Advice was sought 
from a recompression facility and he was transferred there by 
ambulance.  He was given recompression treatment but, after 2 
hours he felt quite poorly and the treatment was terminated.   
He had a second treatment the following day after which he was 
discharged. 
August 2005 05/448 
Newcastle General Hospital contacted Humber Coastguard 
requesting assistance to transfer a casualty to a recompression 
chamber, the diver had made two dives earlier that day, the first 
30m the second 15m with a 30 min surface interval, the 
casualty developed numbness in his hand on the first dive 
which was exacerbated on the second, the diver was given 
medical advice and transferred from hospital by ambulance to 
Hull hyperbaric chamber for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/449 
Portland Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI, 
Coastguard rescue helicopter R-WB was tasked to recover the 
casualty to recompression chamber, the helicopter was met at 
the HLS by Poole Coastguard and an ambulance.  (Coastguard 
report). 
August 2005 05/454 
Brixham Coastguard were alerted by dive vessel of a diver 
aboard suffering from suspected DCI following a dive to 26m 46 
min,   the vessel was advised to make way to harbour where 
they were met by Plymouth Coastguard and an ambulance for 
transportation to DDRC Plymouth.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/241 
A diver completed a 40 min dive to a depth of 28m with a 10 
min stop at 6m.  Later that day, while travelling home, he 
developed a pain in his shoulder.  He sought medical advice 
and attended a recompression facility.  He was kept in overnight 
and received recompression treatment the following day which 
resolved his symptoms. 
September 2005 05/460 
Portland Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard who had missed 3 min of stops 
following a dive to 20m, the diver was now semiconscious and 
complained of loss of feeling in the lower limbs, Portland tasked 
Coastguard rescue helicopter R-WB to airlift the casualty to 
recompression chamber, the aircraft was met by Poole 
Coastguard and a waiting ambulance.  (Coastguard report). 
 
September 2005 05/459 
Falmouth Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard with suspected DCI following a 
dive to 32m, a medi-link call was established with QAH, the 
doctor recommended an air evacuation to recompression 
chamber, RN rescue helicopter R-193 transferred the casualty 
to DDRC Plymouth, Penzance Coastguard gathered details 
from the vessel on return to port.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2005 05/462 
Dive RHIB contacted Portland Coastguard reporting having a 
diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI.  Portland 
Coastguard tasked Coastguard helicopter R-WB to airlift the 
casualty to recompression chamber, the aircraft was met at the 
HLS by Poole Coastguard, police and ambulance.  (Coastguard 
report). 
September 2005 05/275 
A diver using trimix completed a dive to 52m for 74 min 
including the following stops; 4 min at 18m, 2 min at 15m, 2 min 
at 12m, 4 min at 9m, and 11 min at 6m.  Later that day his 
shoulder became painful.  He sought medical advice and 
received recompression treatment.  The results were 
inconclusive and it was uncertain if it was DCI or a muscle 
strain. 
September 2005 05/246 
A diver dived to 12m for 57 min.  23 hours later he dived with a 
buddy to 43m.  They started their ascent and, at 35m, his 
computer went blank.  They completed their ascent using the 
buddy's computer.  Their dive duration was 66 min with a 3 min 
stop at 12m, a 1 min stop at 9m, and a 15 min stop at 6m.  The 
diver with the failed computer felt a little light at the 6m stop but 
managed to control his depth by breathing very shallowly.  
Shortly after leaving the water he noticed an ache in his 
shoulder.  He was placed on oxygen and this eased the 
symptom.  Medical advice was sought and the Coastguard was 
alerted.  The diver was airlifted to a recompression facility 
where he received treatment. 
September 2005 05/467 
Stornoway Coastguard received a 999 call from St. Kilda base 
reporting a diver aboard a diving vessel was suffering from 
suspected DCI, a medi-link call was established and the doctor 
recommended immediate air evacuation to a hyperbaric 
chamber at Aberdeen, the casualty was airlifted by RAF rescue 
helicopter R-137.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2005 05/247 
An instructor was engaged in training drills with 2 students.  He 
used a third person to demonstrate controlled buoyant lift; 
ascending from 6m to the surface.  After his demonstration 
each of his students practiced the drill.  They then completed 
some further training at the surface.  About 40 min later the 
students conducted two further controlled buoyant lifts from 6m 
to the surface.  After this the group went for a dive to 22m.  The 
last part of this dive was 6 min at 6m with a normal ascent to 
the surface.  That night the instructor awoke feeling nauseous 
and dizzy and with 'pins and needles' in his hand.  He sought 
medical advice and went to a recompression facility where he 
was treated for DCI.  The treatment resolved his symptoms. 
September 2005 05/255 
A diver conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 49m.  He 
made a 3 min stop at 9m but then surfaced missing other 
planned stops due to an equipment failure.  His dive duration 
was 36 min.  He complained of an all over tingling feeling and 
©BSAC -2005  15 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
pains in his joints.  The Coastguard was alerted and the diver 
was placed on oxygen.  He was taken by lifeboat and helicopter 
to a recompression facility for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2005 05/276 
Two divers completed a dive to 22m for 31 min with a 3 min 
stop at 6m.  2 hours later they dived to 20m for 36 min with a 5 
min stop at 6m.  During the ascent from this last dive they 
struggled to control their buoyancy and went between 18 and 
12m a few times.  They finally managed to stabilise at 15m 
where they deployed their SMB.  Two days later one of the 
divers developed 'pins and needles' in her forearms and lower 
legs and mild joint pain in her hands.  She sought medical 
advice and received four sessions of recompression treatment.  
Eight days after the dive her buddy attended the recompression 
facility with a slight headache.  He received three sessions of 
precautionary recompression treatment. 
September 2005 05/249 
Two divers descended a shotline.  They descended very slowly 
as one of the pair had problems clearing his ears.  They took 15  
min to get to 27m.  After 29 min and with 2 min bottom time 
remaining on their computers they started their ascent.  One of 
the divers deployed his delayed SMB and the other diver used it 
as a guide.  At around 20m the other diver experienced 
buoyancy problems and inverted himself so that he could fin 
downwards.  The SMB line became slack and started to 
become tangled around the buoyant diver so it was abandoned.  
The buddy tried to assist the buoyant diver by attempting to 
release air from his BCD, but he was not able to reach it.  The 
buoyant diver's regulator became dislodged but he was able to 
replace it.  They began to ascend rapidly, the buddy let go of 
the buoyant diver and they became separated.  The buddy 
made a normal ascent.  The buoyant diver rose directly to the 
surface.  He was recovered into the boat and placed on oxygen.  
The buddy breathed nitrox 40 once back in the boat.  The 
Coastguard was alerted and the divers were airlifted to a 
hospital.  Both were found to be asymptomatic and discharged.  
The following day the buoyant diver developed a rash, nausea 
and giddiness.  He sought medical advice and received 
recompression treatment.  His symptoms were resolved. 
September 2005 05/250 
A diver conducted a 22 min dive to a depth of 16m.  24 hours 
later he dived to 44m.  He was using a drysuit that he was not 
familiar with and on the first dive a lot of water leaked into the 
suit.  Believing that the suit's automatic valve was at fault, he 
left it closed during the second dive and attempted to operate it 
manually.  As he ascended the shotline from the second dive 
he felt buoyant and had difficulty dumping air.  He made a 1 min 
stop at 24m, a 2 min stop at 21m, a 1 min stop at 18m and a 2 
min stop at 15m.  Due to his buoyancy problems and the effects 
of swell, he missed a planned stop at 12m.   He had switched to 
nitrox 50 at 16m and he made an extended 7 min stop at 9m.  
He then moved to 6m where he intended to make a 21 min 
stop.  He attempted to dump air from his suit by depressing the 
dump valve and squeezing his arms against his torso to drive 
air out of the suit.  He thinks that this action inadvertently 
actuated the air feed to his BCD.  The result was that he made 
a buoyant ascent to the surface, missing 17 min of 
decompression.  He was recovered into the boat and placed on 
oxygen.  The Coastguard was alerted and the diver was airlifted 
to a recompression facility where he received treatment. 
September 2005 05/473 
Portland Coastguard received a 'Pan Pan' call from dive vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard suffering from suspected DCI 
following a rapid ascent from 29m, lost buoyancy control on 
ascent despite best efforts to dump air.  The casualty was 
recovered to the parent vessel and given oxygen, Portland 
Coastguard tasked Coastguard rescue helicopter R-WB to airlift 
the casualty to recompression chamber, the helicopter was met 
by Poole Coastguard and an ambulance at the HLS.  
(Coastguard report). 
 
 
 
Decompression data source analysis 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Newspaper
RNLI
BSAC
Coastguard
Number of reports 
 
September 2005 05/252 
A diver conducted a 38 min dive to 31m with a 1 min stop at 
each of 18, 15 and 9m and a 3 min stop at 6m and 3m.  2 hours 
30 min later he dived to 29m.  During the ascent from this dive 
he began to feel too buoyant.  At 9m he tried to fin downwards 
to maintain his stop depths but this became increasingly more 
difficult.  He had risen to 6m and at this point decided to stop 
trying to hold his depth.  He signalled to his two buddies and 
rose to the surface.  At the surface he was recovered into the 
boat, given water and p .  His computer 
indicated that he had miss
His dive duration was 32 
ascent.  The Coastguard w
the diver and brought him
ambulance to a recompres
that his balance was affect
treatment significantly impro
September 2005 
Clyde Coastguard was a
suspected DCI following a r
requested medical advice 
RAF rescue helicopter 
recompression chamber.  C
Cumbrae assisted.  (Coastg
September 2005 
Portland Coastguard receiv
reporting having a diver ab
following a dive to 30m, the
dive according to computer
casualty to the HLS where 
Dorset ambulance service. 
 
16      laced on oxygen
ed 7 min of decompression stops.  
min.  His buddies made a normal 
as alerted and a lifeboat collected 
 to the shore.  He was taken by 
sion facility.  Examination indicated 
ed and he was recompressed.  The 
ved his symptoms. 
05/475 
lerted to a diver suffering from 
apid ascent from 50m, the diver had 
from ARI, Clyde Coastguard tasked 
R-177 to airlift the casualty to 
oastguard teams from Tarbert and 
uard report). 
05/476 
ed a call from a dive support vessel 
oard suffering from suspected DCI, 
 diver had completed all deco for the 
, rescue helicopter R-WB airlifted the 
it was met by Poole Coastguard and 
 (Coastguard report). 
  ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
Injury / Illness 
 
 
October 2004 05/009 
Two divers entered the water, descended to 6m and then 
followed the sloping bottom into deeper water.  At 13m the dive 
leader looked round for his buddy, but could not see her.  He 
surfaced and waited to see if she came to the surface too.  When 
she did not he raised the alarm.  A rescue team quickly 
responded.  Meanwhile two other divers had found the missing 
diver, on her back, on the bottom at 6m, with her regulator out of 
her mouth.  They brought her to the surface and she was 
recovered from the water.  Resuscitation techniques were 
applied and the emergency services were alerted.  She was 
taken by ambulance to hospital where her condition was 
described as critical. 
October 2004 05/006 
A pair of divers descended a shotline to a depth of 11m.  On 
arrival at the bottom, one of the pair experienced dizziness, 
nausea and disorientation.  He had a sharp pain in his ear and 
the feeling of liquid moving around.  The divers aborted the dive, 
making a normal ascent to the surface.  Subsequent medical 
examination revealed a burst eardrum. 
November 2004 05/024 
A group of divers travelled by RHIB to a dive site.  Once there, 
one of the group started to feel seasick.  He was sick but then 
felt well enough to make the dive.  He dived to 35m for 25 min.  
Once back on the boat he continued to be sick.  He then 
complained of feeling cold.  The air temperature was 4 deg C 
and the water temperature was 13 deg C.  He was given warm 
clothing to wear and a hot drink.  He was sheltered from the wind 
on the return trip.  The radio was used to call an ambulance 
which met the party when it arrived back in the harbour.  The 
casualty was found to have suffered from mild hypothermia but 
he quickly recovered. 
November 2004 05/015 
Two divers dived to a depth of 27m.  12 min into the dive one of 
the pair indicated that he had a problem with his head and that 
he wanted to return to the surface.  He switched to his pony 
cylinder which contained nitrox 27.  They started their ascent but 
the troubled diver experienced problems with his buoyancy 
control and began to sink; every time he put air into his suit it 
escaped through the dump valve.  His buddy brought him to 6m 
using a controlled buoyant lift; at this point the troubled diver 
regained control and they finished the dive.  Once out of the 
water, the troubled diver explained that he had nearly passed out 
and that he had had a bad headache that got better when he 
switched to his alternative gas supply.  The diver conducted a 
dive the following day without any problem.  Subsequent testing 
revealed no problems with the quality of the diver's air. 
December 2004 05/327 
Portland Coastguard received a mobile telephone call from the 
coordinator of a diving course reporting having a diver suffering 
from breathlessness.  The diver was administered oxygen at the 
scene by the diving supervisor, an ambulance was tasked by 
Portland Coastguard attending to the diver who was transferred 
to hospital as a precautionary measure.  (Coastguard report). 
December 2004 05/014 
A diver using a rebreather conducted a dive to 36m.  Later he 
dived again to a depth of 20m.  He began to feel uneasy, his 
vision blurred and he began to feel confused.  He switched to an 
open circuit regulator and the symptoms resolved.  He flushed 
the loop of his rebreather and switched back to it.  A little later he 
began to feel unwell again and again he flushed the loop.  Later 
he repeated this process and then he ascended to the surface.  
Subsequently the diver found a small quantity of water in the 
scrubber.  He also felt that some settling had taken place in the 
scrubber. 
December 2004 05/033 
A diver conducted a dive to a maximum of 20m wearing a two-
piece, 5mm wetsuit.  During the dive he became cold so he 
swam back to the exit point with his buddy.  Once at the surface 
he became very cold and had to be treated for hypothermia. 
January 2005 05/044 
Two trainees and an instructor were engaged in a pool training 
session.  The instructor demonstrated an exit over the side of the 
pool at the deep end.  The trainees removed their equipment and 
made a similar exit.  One of them hit the side of the pool and 
then climbed out.  Later that day he felt discomfort and attended 
hospital.  A cracked rib was discovered. 
January 2005 05/035 
Two divers were engaged in a dive at a depth of 25m.  After 30 
min, one of the pair began to feel ill.  She felt nauseous and she 
had a headache.  Her buddy brought her to the surface and she 
was placed on oxygen.  The diver was taken by ambulance to 
hospital and released later that afternoon.  Contamination of her 
air supply was suspected. 
February 2005 05/063 
After a dive in a quarry a diver was carrying her twin cylinder set 
up some steps when she slipped and fell.  She hit her face on 
the steps.  She had cuts to her forehead and bruising. 
February 2005 05/481 
Lifeboat launched to assist diver(s) with illness.  One person 
brought in.  (RNLI report). 
February 2005 05/283 
A member of the public was participating in a 'Try Dive' session 
in a swimming pool.  She had signed a fitness to dive form and 
after a briefing session participated in the use of diving 
equipment in a depth of 2m.  She then took a swimming test and 
entered the water for a second session with diving equipment.  
At this point she stated that she felt unwell.  She felt a tightness 
around her neck, nausea and a feeling of indigestion.  She was 
assisted from the water.  Her condition deteriorated and an 
ambulance was called.  The diver then stated that she suffered 
from lupus and was on steroid treatment.  She was placed on 
oxygen and taken to hospital. 
March 2005 05/285 
A diver was carrying a cylinder along the side of a swimming 
pool.  He slipped and fell and his dive cylinder bounced off the 
floor and hit him in the face.  He was dazed but required no 
medical attention. 
March 2005 05/100 
A diver was at his maximum depth of 21m when his regulator 
began to free flow.  He made a rapid ascent to the surface.  His 
©BSAC -2005   17 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
total dive time was 6 min.  The water temperature was 6 deg C.  
His tongue and the inside of his mouth were frozen and he could 
not talk.  He was removed from the water and placed on oxygen.  
He lost skin from the inside of his mouth over the next few days 
but suffered no other ill effects. 
March 2005 05/072 
An elderly diver conducted a dive to 16m using an 8l cylinder.  
He ran out of air after 3 min.  His buddy offered her alternative 
air source but he refused this and made a fast ascent to the 
surface.  He arrived at the surface unconscious.  He was 
recovered to the shore and two divers from another party helped 
with the resuscitation efforts.  An automatic defibrillator was 
used.  After a few minutes the casualty began to breathe for 
himself.  He regained consciousness and was taken by 
helicopter to hospital.  His buddy was taken by ambulance to 
hospital and treated for shock. 
March 2005 05/106 
Two divers had completed a 20 min dive to 20m.  Once at the 
surface they signalled to their boat.  Another boat mistook the 
divers for their own and approached them.  The mistake was 
realised and the boat was put into neutral and it drifted between 
them.  Once the boat had passed the divers regrouped.  
However this boat then drifted too close to the divers and, not 
realising that they were close, the cox put the engine into gear.  
One diver managed to hold on to the boat but the other was 
struck on the legs by the propeller.  Once the engine had been 
shut off the injured diver pulled himself to the side of the boat, 
assisted by his buddy.  They were recovered into the boat and 
the diver's injuries were assessed.  They were then transferred 
into their own boat and the injured diver was taken to hospital.  
He was treated for grazes and cuts to his legs, one cut required 
five stitches. 
March 2005 05/109 
A diver made a 25 min dive to 6m.  1 hour 20 min later he dived 
to 6m for 25 min.  After this dive he suffered from cold, he was 
shivering and felt sick.  He was placed on oxygen and 45 min 
later had made a full recovery.  The water temperature was 6 
deg C. 
April 2005 05/084 
A diver was stepping into an RHIB from a pontoon when she 
slipped and landed awkwardly on her left ankle.  She was taken 
to hospital and treated for a broken ankle. 
April 2005 05/346 
Clyde Coastguard were contacted by a dive party reporting a 
member of their club was displaying symptoms of DCI 36 hours 
after a dive.  The diver was medi-linked with a doctor, the 
discussion covered the activities of the post-dive events.  It was 
decided to airlift casualty to hospital for further investigation, air 
ambulance transported to hospital where the casualty was 
treated for jellyfish stings.  (Coastguard report). 
April 2005 05/138 
A diver conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 20m.  During 
the ascent the delayed SMB became tangled with the shotline 
due to poor visibility and a strong current.  The diver completed a 
3 min safety stop on the shotline.  When he let go of the shotline 
he sank, with his buddy, back down to 10m from where they 
made a quick ascent to the surface.  Two days later the diver 
experienced a tingling in his arm.  He sought advice from a 
recompression facility and received two sessions of 
recompression treatment.  His symptoms persisted.  He was 
referred to his doctor and the final diagnosis was tennis elbow; a 
condition that he had suffered from previously. 
April 2005 05/491 
Lifeboat launched to assist diver(s) with illness.  One person 
brought in.  (RNLI report). 
April 2005 05/349 
Portland Coastguard received a call from a dive vessel reporting 
having an injured crewman onboard.  The injury occurred when 
the anchor was recovered, the casualty suffered a hand trapped 
between the anchor rope and gunwale as the vessel pitched.  
The vessel was responding to a request for assistance from 
another vessel that had broken down.  The vessel was met by an 
ambulance and Swanage Coastguard on return to port.  
(Coastguard report). 
April 2005 05/089 
An instructor and two trainees started a descent.  At 5m one of 
the trainees signalled 'stop' and indicated a problem with his left 
ear.  The instructor brought them back up to 3m and the trainee 
indicated that all was well.  They re-descended very slowly and 
reached the bottom at 12m without further incident.  After the 
dive the diver with the ear problem reported that his ear was 
sore.  The passage to his eardrum was inflamed and swollen 
and blood was seeping from the ear.  He sought medical 
attention.  He was given pain killers and advised to seek re-
examination two weeks later, prior to any further diving. 
May 2005 05/294 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 25m.  
Towards the end of the dive one of the pair began to feel unwell.  
They started to ascend the shotline, after a duration of 26 min, 
and the troubled diver then found it difficult to breathe.  They 
moved up the shotline but the condition did not improve.  They 
made a 1 min stop at 6m but the troubled diver decided that she 
could not continue her stops and she ascended to the surface.  
At the surface she struggled to breathe and had to be assisted 
back into the boat.  Her buddy made a normal ascent. The diver 
was placed on oxygen and the Coastguard was alerted.  The 
casualty was airlifted to a hospital and a pulmonary immersion 
oedema was diagnosed.  She was given a precautionary 
recompression treatment for the missed stops.  She was not 
thought to have been suffering from DCI.  She was discharged 
from hospital the following day. 
May 2005 05/127 
A diver completed a dive to a maximum depth of 15m for a 
duration of 20 min.  He became separated from his buddy, 
briefly, towards the end of the dive.  The party returned to the 
shore and 2 to 3 hours after the dive the diver complained of 
pain in his chest and difficulty breathing.  He had been working 
hard carrying and sorting diving equipment.  He was placed on 
oxygen and taken to a recompression facility.  A heart problem 
was diagnosed and the diver was taken to hospital.  He was 
found to have had a mild heart attack. 
May 2005 05/125 
Three divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 34m.  One 
used nitrox and the other two used air.  They planned to conduct 
their decompression according to the air computer but 
incorporating deep stops.  After 28 min they started their ascent.   
They conducted the following stops; 20m for 2 min, 13m for 2 
min and 6m for 1 min.  They then started to ascend to 3m for 
further stops.  However there was a strong swell which could be 
felt at 5m so they stopped there to conduct the remaining stops.  
After 1 min, one of the three became seasick and vomited.  This 
diver was able to remove their mouthpiece to vomit and then 
18        ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
replace it.  However the second time the mouthpiece was not 
removed and proved difficult to clear.  This diver and one other 
ascended to the surface; the last 3m of the ascent was fast.  The 
divers were recovered into the boat.  The air divers had missed 
12 min of decompression stops.  The diver who had been sick 
was placed on oxygen and the other on nitrox 75.  The third diver 
had not missed stops.  The Coastguard was alerted and medical 
advice was sought.  The boat started its return journey during 
which the two air divers were airlifted to a recompression facility.  
They exhibited no symptoms but received precautionary 
recompression treatment. 
May 2005 05/092 
A diver panicked and banged his head.  He subsequently 
swallowed seawater.  The Coastguard was alerted and the 
injured diver was airlifted to hospital.  During this time a rope 
became tangled round the boat's propeller and the boat drifted 
away from two other divers who were still in the water.  Another 
helicopter was launched and other boats in the area asked to 
assist.  Another dive boat recovered the two divers and returned 
them to the disabled boat.  Two lifeboats were launched to assist 
and the helicopter was recalled.  One of the party managed to 
free the propeller and the boat returned safely to shore.  
(Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
May 2005 05/141 
Three divers entered the water to conduct training drills with an 
SMB.  The trainee carrying the SMB made a rapid uncontrolled 
descent because he was concentrating on the SMB reel.  He 
failed to equalise his mask on descent and he suffered mask 
squeeze.  He equalised on the bottom and the dive continued 
with our incident.  Their maximum depth was 22m and the dive 
lasted 22 min.  Later the diver felt discomfort and sought medical 
advice.  He was sent to an eye specialist but no permanent 
damage was discovered. 
May 2005 05/132 
A diver entered the water and attempted to dive.  He tried three 
times but each time he experienced a severe pain behind his 
eyes and was forced to surface.  He reached a maximum depth 
of 6m and his total dive duration was less than 3 min.  After 
leaving the water he collapsed.  He was placed on oxygen and 
taken, by ambulance, to hospital from where he was discharged 
later that day.  It is thought that the problem was not diving 
related. 
May 2005 05/227 
A group of four divers commenced a dive on a wreck to a 
maximum depth of 36m.  Once at the wreck, one of the four felt 
uneasy and indicated that she had a problem.  The dive leader 
signalled that they should ascend.  At this point one of the others 
began to panic.  The dive leader brought both divers up the 
shotline, with his buddy following behind.  He asked the dive 
boat to pick up the two divers and returned to his buddy who was 
at 10m.  On reaching the surface the buddy complained of a 
tightness when she breathed.  She was placed on oxygen and 
taken to hospital.  The diver received treatment for a pulmonary 
oedema. 
May 2005 05/360 
Solent Coastguard received a call from a diving vessel reporting 
having a diver aboard suffering from respiratory distress 
following a normal dive and ascent.  The casualty was airlifted 
from the vessel by Coastguard rescue helicopter R-IJ and 
transferred to a waiting ambulance for transportation to hospital.  
(Coastguard report). 
May 2005 05/365 
Dive support vessel called Brixham Coastguard reporting having 
an unconscious diver aboard receiving oxygen.  The casualty 
had ceased breathing and was receiving CPR.  Brixham 
Coastguard tasked RN rescue helicopter R-193 to airlift casualty 
from vessel.  Plymouth Coastguard assisted at the HLS the 
casualty was transferred to a waiting ambulance for transport to 
DDRC Plymouth.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2005 05/143 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 21m. At the 
start of the dive they had to fin hard to gain depth and to move 
out of a strong current.   After 33 min they ascended from 14m to 
the surface in 3 min.  At the surface both inflated their BCDs and 
awaited collection by their boat.  At this point one of the divers 
stated that he could not move.  His buddy supported him and 
summoned assistance.  He was recovered into the boat and his 
wetsuit was removed.  He was totally paralysed and had lost his 
sight.  The Coastguard was alerted and the boat returned to the 
shore.  They were met by an ambulance and a helicopter arrived 
to assist.  It was initially concluded that he had not suffered DCI.  
The diver's paralysis resolved and his sight returned.  He was 
airlifted to a recompression facility for observation. 
May 2005 05/198 
A trainee was diving to a maximum depth of 6m with an 
instructor and another trainee.  He began to feel unwell and 
made a rapid ascent to the surface.  His dive duration was 32 
min.  At the surface he was sick twice.  He complained of feeling 
tired and that his shoulder hurt.  He was placed on oxygen.  He 
declined to seek further medical advice and subsequently 
reported that he had had little sleep the previous night and that a 
migraine attack had caused the problem. 
 
May 2005 05/197 
A trainee diver was conducting drills at a depth of 6m.  She 
began to feel unwell and she ascended with her instructor.  Their 
dive duration was 20 min.  She was placed on oxygen but 
continued to feel unwell.  She returned home and sought medical 
advice. 
May 2005 05/370 
Brixham Coastguard tasked RN rescue helicopter R-193 to airlift 
a diver from dive support craft, the diver was lapsing in and out 
of consciousness and was flown to DDRC Plymouth.  
(Coastguard report). 
May 2005 05/199 
Two divers completed a 32 min dive to a maximum depth of 
17m.  Once at the surface one of the pair suffered blurred vision.  
He also noted a pain down the side of his face and into his jaw, 
and he suffered a slight nose bleed.  He was placed on oxygen 
and his condition improved.  He was advised to seek medical 
advice. 
May 2005 05/147 
A diver completed an air dive to 33m for 35 min with a 2 min stop 
at 9m and a 6 min stop at 6m.  2 hours 14 min later he made a 
second dive.  He dived using nitrox 36.  He descended the 
shotline but reached his maximum oxygen depth of 29m before 
reaching the bottom.  He aborted the dive and made a 3 min 
stop at 6m.  His second dive duration was 11 min.  He later slept 
in his car before departing.  When he woke up he had 'pins and 
needles' in his right arm.  These symptoms started to disappear 
as soon as he started driving, but did not resolve completely.  He 
sought medical advice and went to a recompression facility.   
©BSAC -2005   19 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
He was given recompression treatment.  His symptoms 
improved but did not disappear.  He subsequently consulted a 
physiotherapist and a trapped nerve was diagnosed. 
June 2005 05/156 
Two divers completed a 10 min dive to a maximum depth of 
35m.  Back in the boat, whilst waiting for other divers, one of the 
pair was sick.  Once ashore she carried her kit to the top of some 
steps.  She became breathless and complained of chest pains.  
She was placed on oxygen and advice was sought from a 
recompression facility.  She was taken to hospital and kept in for 
observation. 
June 2005 05/382 
Solent Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard with respiratory distress following 
a dive to 82m, the casualty was airlifted by Coastguard 
helicopter R-IJ direct from the vessel and transported to QAH for 
treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2005 05/297 
Two pairs of divers entered the water from a quayside.  The last 
to enter struck her leg on an underwater object.  She felt a pain 
in her leg and ankle.  She told the others but after a while 
decided that she could continue the dive.  They dived to 11m for 
a duration of 29 min.  When they surfaced the diver said that her 
leg was hurting badly.  She was carried from the water.  Her 
knee was found to be badly swollen.  She was taken to hospital 
where a broken tibia was found which required surgical 
resolution. 
June 2005 05/392 
Two divers were transferred from a dive boat after feeling 
discomfort following a dive to 28m for 27 min, the divers were 
met by ambulance and Plymouth Coastguard for transportation 
the hospital/chamber.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/409 
Brixham Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard suffering from shortness of 
breath following a dive to 34m, the diver was met by paramedic 
and a medi-link call to DDRC Plymouth concluded the diver was 
thought to be suffering from a non-dive related problem.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/411 
Milford Haven Coastguard received a call from a dive boat 
reporting having two divers aboard having swallowed salt water 
upon ascent, medical advice was sought and an ambulance was 
requested to meet the divers on their return to shore, no further 
medical assistance required.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/419 
Portland Coastguard received a call from a dive boat reporting 
having picked up a diver from another RHIB who had possible 
head injury.  Upon further investigations, the casualty had been 
given oxygen and water, was also suffering contraction type 
pains, the vessel picking up the buddy diver had a doctor on 
board, the casualty, buddy and casualty's partner were 
recovered by Coastguard rescue helicopter R-WB.  The vessel 
had a faulty VHF and was met by West Bay Coastguard where 
safety advice was given to the crew.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/302 
Two divers entered the water to dive to a wreck.  There was a 
current and they had to swim hard to reach the shotline.  They 
pulled themselves down the shotline.  One of the pair became 
very tired.  At the bottom they swam around the wreck.  The tired 
diver kept returning OK signals but her buddy realised that she 
was not right and led her back to the shotline.  Their bottom time 
was 16 min.  They ascended to 5m where they made a safety 
stop.  The buddy then saw that the distressed diver's head was 
rolling backwards and forwards in the swell.  She then floated to 
the surface.  Her buddy followed.  At the boat she was not able 
to hold on, she had her regulator out and water was washing 
over her.  Her regulator was replaced and she was assisted into 
the boat.  She was placed on oxygen and her condition 
improved.  She coughed up bloodstained sputum.  Once ashore 
the diver was able to walk up the slipway.  Then she experienced 
breathing difficulties.  She was placed on oxygen and taken to 
hospital.  She was found to have pulmonary oedema.  A mild 
heart attack was also suggested.  Tests continue. 
August 2005 05/195 
Portland Coastguard received a 'Mayday' call from dive support 
vessel conducting a technical dive to 55m, one of the divers 
surfaced unconscious and not breathing, Coastguard rescue 
helicopter R-WB was diverted from exercise to recover the 
casualty from the vessel.  As the casualty was in a very serious 
condition the helicopter took the casualty to hospital, the two 
buddy divers were airlifted by Coastguard rescue helicopter R-IJ, 
both aircraft delivered the casualties to the HLS at Poole where 
they were met by a doctor, ambulance and Poole Coastguard all 
divers received treatment. The dive details showed that one 
casualty had used the incorrect % of oxygen being 100% instead 
of 50% making him convulse, was aided to the surface by buddy 
divers and recovered into the vessel by hydraulic lift.  
(Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/307 
A diver was attempting to enter a boat by the stern.  The diver 
was struck by the boat's moving propeller and one of his legs 
was amputated.  He was recovered into another boat and the 
Coastguard was alerted.  The diver was taken to the shore and 
then by ambulance and helicopter to hospital.  His other leg was 
badly injured and it was amputated too.  A doctor who was diving 
in the area heard the emergency call and went to assist. 
August 2005 05/267 
A diver was kitting up for a dive from a boat.  The boat was 
caught by a swell and this caused the diver to fall.  She hit her 
head on a railing of the boat.  She felt no pain and there was no 
visible injury.  She completed a 32 min dive to 20m with 3 min 
decompression at 6m.  Two days later she developed sickness, 
dizziness, a headache, double vision and confusion.  She sought 
medical advice.  Concussion was diagnosed.  She made a full 
recovery. 
August 2005 05/269 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 15m.  The 
dive followed a saw tooth profile.  One of the divers felt dizzy and 
they aborted the dive, making a normal ascent with a safety stop.  
The diver who had felt unwell was placed on oxygen for 20 min 
and advised to seek medical help if he experienced further 
problems. 
August 2005 05/240 
A diver conducted a 33 min dive to a depth of 16m.  1 hour 52 
min later she dived to a maximum depth of 16m for 27 min.  Most 
of the dive was spent at about 7m.  Towards the end of the dive 
she indicated to the dive leader that she had a headache and 
wanted to ascend.  They made a normal ascent and were 
recovered into the boat.  The diver then began to feel sick.  This 
was initially put down to rough sea conditions but once on land 
20        ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
she continued to be sick.  Medical advice was sought and she 
was taken to hospital.  A non-diving related illness was 
diagnosed.  The diver had recovered by the following day. 
August 2005 05/272 
Two divers were 10 min into a dive at a depth of 12m when one 
of them felt that he could not breathe.  He made a rapid ascent 
to the surface and was assisted from the water.  He was in 
distress and the emergency services were alerted.  The diver 
was placed on oxygen and taken to hospital by ambulance.  He 
was discharged later that day.  It was initially thought that he had 
suffered a heart attack, but later it was suggested that the diver 
had been suffering from a chest infection. 
August 2005 05/273 
Two divers conducted a 45 min dive to 19m with 15 min spent at 
6m at the end of the dive.  Afterwards one of the two felt unwell 
and weak.  He was placed on oxygen and his condition quickly 
improved. 
August 2005 05/447 
Humber Coastguard tasked RAF rescue helicopter to airlift a 
diver suffering from a diving related illness to hospital for 
treatment.  MRCC Aberdeen arranged an ambulance at the HLS, 
where it was met by Seahouses Coastguard and RNLI 
personnel.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/274 
A diver conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 25m.  Just prior 
to his ascent he coughed and as a result inhaled some water.   
This caused him to continue coughing all through his ascent and 
a 3 min safety stop at 6m.  At the surface he was able to regain 
control and suffered no subsequent ill effects.  His dive duration 
was 40 min 
August 2005 05/243 
A diver entered the water with three others to conduct 
navigational training drills.  During the descent she was 
concentrating on the exercise and forgot to clear her ears.  
When she did attempt to clear them she heard a loud pop in her 
left ear and became very disorientated, feeling that she was 
spinning round.  She indicated the problem to her dive buddy 
and the group assisted her to the surface.  Once at the surface 
she began to feel better and decided to make a second attempt 
at the task.  She descended to 13m and started the exercise.  
She then began to feel dizzy and nauseous again.  She indicated 
this to the dive leader and they aborted the dive.  The other two 
divers continued alone.  The following day the diver attended 
hospital where a perforated ear drum was diagnosed.  It was 
later discovered that one of the divers from the second pair had 
also suffered a minor eardrum perforation.  This second diver 
had a history of ear drum weakness and previous perforations; 
but had been cleared to dive. 
September 2005 05/244 
A diver completed a 37 min dive to a depth of 24m with a 3 min 
stop at 6m.  4 hours 47 min later she dived to 29m for 37 min 
with a 3 min safety stop at 6m.  Shortly afterwards she 
complained of a very bad headache.  She was given water and 
lay down in the wheelhouse of the boat.  15 min later she began 
to shake and reported chest and back pains and a shortage of 
breath.  She was placed on oxygen and the Coastguard was 
alerted.  The diver was airlifted to hospital where a severe 
migraine was diagnosed.  The diver was discharged from 
hospital the following day. 
September 2005 05/245 
A diver completed a 49 min dive to a depth of 22m with a 2 min 
safety stop at 6m.  After this dive he had a slight headache which 
cleared after 15 min.  3 hours 6 min later he dived to 22m for 43 
min with a 2 min safety stop at 6m.  After this dive the diver 
complained of a headache and was sick.  On return to shore he 
breathed nitrox 50 for 1 min and this improved his headache.  
Later that evening it was noticed that he was developing an 
expanding rash.  He sought medical advice and received two 
sessions of recompression treatment.  It was concluded that the 
condition was not diving related. 
September 2005 05/279 
Two divers dived to a depth of 6m at which point one of the pair 
experienced chest pains.  They aborted the dive.  The pains 
continued for a further 20 min and the diver planned to seek 
medical advice. 
September 2005 05/278 
A diver was preparing to enter the water from a landing stage.  
Whilst putting her fins on she fell and injured her knee.  She was 
taken to hospital for treatment. 
September 2005 05/478 
Brixham Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard who was feeling unwell, the 
vessel was met by ambulance and the casualty transferred to the 
DDRC for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
 
 
©BSAC -2005   21 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
Boating & Surface Incidents 
 
 
October 2004 05/315 
Dive support vessel broke down with ten divers in the water.  
Largs Lifeboat was tasked by Clyde Coastguard to assist.  The 
divers were recovered by two other vessels, the stricken vessel 
escorted to shore by Lifeboat.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
November 2004 05/323 
Stornoway Coastguard received a 999 call from a diving group, 
reporting a missing diver.  Stornoway Coastguard tasked 
rescue helicopter G-BIMU and Portree lifeboat.  The diver 
surfaced safe and well before search units arrived on scene.  
(Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
November 2004 05/324 
Stornoway Coastguard received a call from a broken down dive 
boat with two POB.  Kyle lifeboat was tasked to tow the vessel 
ashore, where she was met by Kyle Coastguard team.  
(Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
December 2004 05/480 
Two lifeboats launched to assist dive boat with engine problems 
and missing diver(s).  Nine people landed and craft escorted in.  
(RNLI report). 
February 2005 05/331 
Clyde Coastguard received a 'Mayday' call on VHF channel 16 
from a dive support vessel reporting a missing diver.  Clyde 
Coastguard tasked Oban Coastguard team and lifeboat and RN 
rescue helicopter R - 177 together with other local vessels. The 
diver was recovered safe and well in pos 56 23.3N 005 35.08W.  
Following assessment by a doctor aboard the lifeboat no further 
medical treatment was required.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
February 2005 05/334 
Following a 999 call transferred via Falmouth Coastguard, 
Brixham Coastguard took details of a vessel aground.  There 
followed a 'Mayday' call on VHF from the vessel.  Brixham 
Coastguard tasked Looe lifeboat.  The stricken dive boat 
managed to free herself and made own way back to port 
escorted by Looe LB.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
February 2005 05/482 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  Others 
coped.  (RNLI report). 
March 2005 05/336 
Portland Coastguard received a 999 call from a dive RHIB, 
reporting having broken down with a mechanical failure.  No 
divers in the water.  (Coastguard report). 
March 2005 05/483 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report). 
March 2005 05/484 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report). 
 
March 2005 05/073 
With four divers in the water the engine of a dive RHIB cut out 
after having given the cox a couple of electric shocks.  The 
engine could not be restarted.  The cox contacted the 
Coastguard.  A hardboat took the RHIB in tow whilst another 
RHIB recovered their divers and transferred them to the 
disabled RHIB.  The RHIB was towed back to the home port of 
the hardboat.  During the return trip it was discovered that the 
throttle linkage had broken. 
March 2005 05/338 
Humber Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
requesting assistance to find her way to port following a GPS 
failure in poor visibility.  The vessel was assisted by a DF 
bearing, vessel making shore safe and well.  (Coastguard 
report). 
March 2005 05/337 
Brixham Coastguard received a call from a dive vessel 
reporting having lost her propeller, another vessel towed the 
stricken vessel to shore.  Met by Plymouth Coastguard team.  
(Coastguard report). 
March 2005 05/339 
Portland Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reported having broken down with two divers in the water.  
Exmouth lifeboat was tasked to the broken down RHIB, safety 
instructions were passed to the vessel to anchor, the divers 
surfaced, rejoined the dive boat and were able to restart the 
vessel's engine.  The RHIB was then escorted back to port by 
the lifeboat where they were met by Exmouth Coastguard.  
(Coastguard report). 
March 2005 05/485 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  
Craft escorted in.  (RNLI report). 
March 2005 05/486 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  
Craft escorted in.  (RNLI report). 
March 2005 05/487 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report). 
April 2005 05/290 
A group of divers were diving from a hardboat.  The last pair 
were awaiting recovery when the diver lift platform at the stern 
of the boat failed.  There was no back-up ladder on board.  The 
weather was calm so the divers were able to await recovery. 
April 2005 05/347 
Dive support vessel reported having broken down with one 
diver in the water.  Two lifeboats were tasked by Forth 
Coastguard, together with Leven CRT.  The stricken vessel 
recovered diver and was escorted back to port by lifeboats.  
(Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
 
22  ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
April 2005 
Lifeboat launched to ass
Craft towed in.  (RNLI repo
April 2005 
Portland Coastguard recei
reporting having broken d
towed to shore by a Cou
fuel starvation.  (Coastgua
April 2005 
Lifeboat assisted in the s
coped.  (RNLI report). 
April 2005 
A group of seven divers we
first pair surfaced they fou
on the horizon.  An RHIB
the engine of their boat h
boat.  The RHIB made two
divers and return them to
helped the skipper to try t
were thought to be the c
phone to contact another 
boat promised to return 
drifting for 90 min the skipp
of the other boat encourag
contact the Coastguard wh
a Coastguard boat arrived
restart the engine.  Th
accompanied by the other 
April 2005 
Dive boat with one per
broadcast reporting havi
Swanage lifeboat & insho
vessel.  The boat was tow
Swanage Coastguard.  (Co
April 2005 
Humber Coastguard taske
assist a broken down dive
suffered an engine fire, 
(Coastguard & RNLI report
 
 
 
Analysis of boa
0 10
Bad seamanship
Boat problems
Lost divers
Engine problems
 
©BSAC -2005 05/488 
ist dive boat with engine problems.  
rt). 
05/348 
ved a call from a dive support vessel 
own with 5 POB.  The vessel was 
ncil owned vessel, the problem was 
rd report). 
05/489 
earch for missing diver(s).  Others 
05/088 
re diving from a hardboat.  When the 
nd that the hardboat was just visible 
 collected them, informed them that 
ad failed and returned them to the 
 further trips to collect the other five 
 the hardboat.  Some of the divers 
o fix the problem.  Blocked fuel lines 
ause.  The skipper used his mobile 
boat from the same port.  This other 
to assist, but did not do so.  After 
er deployed an anchor.  The skipper 
ed the skipper of the disabled boat to 
ich he did.  Another large RHIB and 
 on scene just as they managed to 
e boat returned safely to shore 
two boats. 
05/351 
son on board made a 'Pan Pan' 
ng broken down close to rocks.  
re lifeboat were tasked to assist the 
ed to shore where they were met by 
astguard report). 
05/352 
d Craster and Seahouses lifeboats to 
 boat with one person aboard having 
the vessel was towed to shore.  
s). 
ting & surface incidents 
20 30 40 50
May 2005 05/126 
Whilst travelling to a dive site the engine of a dive boat became 
starved of fuel.  The fuel filter and water separator were by- 
passed and the engine restarted and ran without problem.  After 
their dive the party returned to a marina and a new fuel filter 
was fitted.  The engine started and ran well.  On the way to the 
second dive site the engine stopped again.  The bulb pump in 
the fuel line was operated and the engine was restarted and ran 
without problem during the second dive.  On the return journey 
the engine stopped a third time and could not be restarted.  The 
Coastguard was alerted and the boat anchored.  The boat was 
safely towed ashore by an inshore lifeboat. 
May 2005 05/258 
An RHIB made a 5 mile trip to a dive site with six divers on 
board.  On route the steering system failed.  A paddle was 
strapped to the engine in an attempt to regain steering but the 
paddle broke.  Two divers then held the engine in a straight 
ahead position and two others steered the boat with their feet 
and fins at the bow.  In this manner they made their way safely 
back to their launch point. 
May 2005 05/493 
Two lifeboats assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  One 
person brought in.  (RNLI report). 
May 2005 05/363 
Dive RHIB contacted Belfast Coastguard reporting having 
broken down with four divers in the water.  Larne AWLB towed 
vessel to shore, where they were met by Portmuck Coastguard 
team.  The divers had self recovered to the parent vessel.  
(Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
May 2005 05/361 
Following a 999 call to Holyhead Coastguard, a dive support 
vessel reporting they had broken down with seven POB, 
Trearddur Bay lifeboat was launched and towed the stricken 
vessel back to shore.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
May 2005 05/367 
Dive RHIB contacted Brixham Coastguard reporting having 
broken down, Plymouth lifeboat was tasked to tow the stricken 
vessel to shore,  however the vessel restarted her engines, the 
vessel was escorted to shore by Plymouth lifeboat.  
(Coastguard report). 
May 2005 05/368 
Holyhead Coastguard tasked Trearddur Bay lifeboat and 
Rhosniger Coastguard team to investigate a report of a broken 
down dive RHIB, the vessel was found to have run out of fuel 
and towed back to shore by the lifeboat.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2005 05/371 
Falmouth Coastguard tasked Penlee lifeboat and Penzance 
Coastguard team to assist a broken down RHIB with five POB, 
the vessel was towed to safety where the team took details and 
gave safety advice.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
May 2005 05/497 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  Two 
persons landed.  (RNLI report). 
 
Number of incidents 
 
  23 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
June 2005 05/149 
Two divers entered the water and dived to a depth of 22m.  
After 5 min they deployed a delayed SMB.  Unknown to the 
divers, this SMB split and was lost from sight by those in the 
boat.  The boat crew was not able to locate the divers and after 
their anticipated ascent time had passed the Coastguard was 
alerted.  Meanwhile the divers surfaced and inflated two SMBs 
which they used to attract the attention of those in the boat.  
They were recovered safely from the water and the Coastguard 
was informed. 
June 2005 05/375 
Dive support vessel was spotted as broken down from Humber 
Coastguard operations room, the Bridlington lifeboat was 
launched to tow the stricken vessel back to shore.  (Coastguard 
& RNLI reports). 
June 2005 05/500 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report). 
June 2005 05/502 
Lifeboat launched to assist leaking/swamped dive boat.  (RNLI 
report). 
June 2005 05/385 
Dive support vessel whilst answering a call for assistance from 
a broken down jet ski, itself broke down with eleven divers 
onboard.  Poole lifeboat responded to the vessel in difficulty 
and towed the dive boat to shore where it was met by Poole 
Coastguard.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2005 05/505 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  Others 
coped.  (RNLI report). 
June 2005 05/504 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report). 
June 2005 05/387 
Portland Coastguard received a 999 call reporting two divers in 
difficulty following a shore dive.  The divers were shore diving 
when they were taken by the tide and caused to drift away from 
the shore.  Another vessel located them and returned the divers 
to shore, being met by Portland Coastguard.  (Coastguard & 
RNLI reports). 
June 2005 05/164 
Two divers entered the water from an RHIB.  As they 
descended the boat engine stopped.  The boat slowly drifted 
from the dive site and when it was about 100m away an attempt 
was made to restart the engine to return to the site.  It was 
found that there was no electrical power to the engine and it 
could not be restarted.  The boat was paddled back to the site 
and secured to a mooring buoy.  The Coastguard was alerted 
and a lifeboat and a Coastguard boat attended to assist.  The 
divers were recovered into their own boat which was towed 
ashore. 
June 2005 05/394 
Forth Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting a missing diver, RAF rescue helicopter R-131, 
Eyemouth lifeboat, St Abbs and Eyemouth Coastguard assisted 
in the search, police and ambulance also assisted.  The missing 
diver was located safe and recovered by one vessel.  
(Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
June 2005 05/395 
Dive RHIB reported to Brixham Coastguard having broken 
down with five POB, the vessel was towed to shore by 
Teignmouth lifeboat.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
June 2005 05/173 
Two divers entered the water to dive on a wreck.  Their boat 
was anchored on the wreck and they placed a lifting bag on the 
anchor to aid its recovery.  The divers then planned to use a 
delayed SMB for their ascent.  The anchor was recovered but 
the boat's engine could not be restarted.  The anchor was 
redeployed but it dragged in sand and the boat was carried 
towards a beach.  The Coastguard was alerted and two 
lifeboats were launched to assist.  One took the disabled boat in 
tow and the other recovered the divers safely and returned 
them to their boat. 
July 2005 05/400 
Humber Coastguard received a call from a fishing vessel having 
recovered a lone diver, the diver was returned unharmed to the 
parent vessel, on return to shore Amble Coastguard gave safety 
advice to the diver who was uncooperative.  (Coastguard 
report). 
July 2005 05/507 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report). 
July 2005 05/403 
Following a 999 call Humber Coastguard were alerted to a 
broken down dive boat, Redcar lifeboat was tasked to assist the 
broken down vessel, Skinning Grove Coastguard team met the 
vessel to collect details.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
July 2005 05/402 
Humber Coastguard were alerted to a dive boat with seven 
POB having suffered total engine failure, Flamborough lifeboat 
was tasked to tow the stricken vessel to shore.  (Coastguard & 
RNLI reports). 
July 2005 05/508 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat.  Two persons brought in.  
(RNLI report). 
July 2005 05/509 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  Others 
coped.  (RNLI report). 
July 2005 05/169 
The Coastguard was alerted that two divers were missing.  Two 
lifeboats and a helicopter were tasked to search.  The divers 
were spotted by another dive boat and transferred back to their 
own boat by a lifeboat.  The divers had been in the water for 
about 2 hours.  Neither suffered ill effects.  (Coastguard & RNLI 
reports). 
July 2005 05/407 
Dive boat was reported broken down by harbourmaster, another 
dive vessel responded to a call broadcast by Portland 
Coastguard and towed to shore.  (Coastguard report). 
24  ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
July 2005 05/404 
Humber Coastguard were alerted to a broken down dive boat 
with five persons on board, Flamborough Inshore lifeboat was 
tasked to assist, towing the stricken vessel to shore, where they 
were met by Bridlington Coastguard team.  (Coastguard & RNLI 
reports). 
July 2005 05/510 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  One person 
found.  (RNLI report). 
July 2005 05/511 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  Others 
coped.  (RNLI report). 
July 2005 05/410 
Portland Coastguard received a call from a dive boat reporting 
having broken down with divers in the water, Portland 
Coastguard initiated broadcast action for the stricken vessel, 
another dive boat responded picking up the adrift divers 
returning them to the parent vessel, the vessel then managed to 
restart its engines and return to shore unaided.  (Coastguard 
report). 
July 2005 05/512 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat with engine problems.  
Craft towed in.  (RNLI report). 
July 2005 05/415 
A 999 call was received by Portland Coastguard reporting a 
missing diver, Coastguard rescue helicopter R-WB Weymouth 
AWLB and Portland Bill Coastguard were tasked to search for 
the missing diver, a second 999 call reported the diver had 
been located safe and well, all units stood down with the 
Coastguard team gathering details, it transpired the diver had 
drifted away from the group.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/216 
Two divers became separated from their boat in rough sea 
conditions.  A person on shore saw them in the water and 
alerted the Coastguard.  A lifeboat and a helicopter were tasked 
to assist.  One diver made it to the shore and the other was 
recovered by another dive boat.  Neither diver suffered ill 
effects.  (Media report). 
July 2005 05/418 
Dover Coastguard received a call from a dive boat reporting a 
missing diver following a dive to 50m, the diver was recovered 
by parent vessel, no medical treatment was required.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/421 
Forth Coastguard received a call from diving RHIB reporting 
having a missing diver, the diver made a slow ascent and was 
picked up by parent vessel, all SAR units were stood down.  
(Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
July 2005 05/219 
The Coastguard was alerted when a dive boat began to take on 
water.  A lifeboat was launched to assist but, despite using two 
pumps they were unable to prevent the boat from sinking.  The 
divers were brought safely back to shore by the lifeboat.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/190 
The Coastguard was alerted when two divers were overdue 
from a dive.  A Coastguard tug, a fixed wing aircraft and a 
lifeboat were tasked to search.  After 8 min the lost divers were 
found, at the surface, by the tug and safely recovered.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/427 
A dive RHIB suffered engine failure following a fire in the 
thermostat area of the engine compartment, once the fire had 
been extinguished the vessel was towed to shore by another 
vessel.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/429 
Stornoway Coastguard received a call from Mallaig Station 
Officer reporting dive support vessel broken free from its 
moorings and had a line around its propeller, the vessel was 
held offshore by the Mallaig Coastguard team until a diver freed 
the propeller, the vessel was then taken alongside and secured.  
(Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/301 
A group of divers left their dive site to return to the shore.  
About 300m into the journey the engine stopped and could not 
be restarted.  The boat was anchored and the Coastguard was 
alerted.  A lifeboat was tasked to assist and the boat was towed 
ashore.  It was later found that the switch that controlled the 
electric choke on the engine had been inadvertently moved to 
the choke position and the engine was flooded. 
August 2005 05/514 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  Two 
persons brought in.  (RNLI report). 
August 2005 05/431 
Milford Haven Coastguard were alerted to a missing diver, 
immediately tasking Tenby lifeboats and Tenby Coastguard, the 
missing diver was located on rocks by a range safety vessel, 
the diver had deployed his delayed SMB but had drifted away 
from  the support vessel.  It was noted that the diver's gear was 
in good order but the dive boat equipment was very poor.  
(Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/432 
Humber Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having broken down with five POB, Scarborough 
lifeboat  was launched, towing the stricken vessel back to shore 
where she was met by Scarborough Coastguard.  (Coastguard 
report). 
August 2005 05/434 
Portland Coastguard received a 999 call from a member of the 
public reporting seeing a red smoke flare, the report was 
investigated by Portland Coastguard who established the divers 
were adrift from the parent vessel and activated the flare to alert 
other vessels.  The divers were recovered by the parent vessel.  
(Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/435 
Milford Haven Coastguard received a call on VHF from a dive 
support vessel reporting having broken down with divers in the 
water, a request for assistance was broadcast by Milford Haven 
Coastguard, another vessel responded recovering all divers 
and returning them to shore, the parent vessel restarted its 
engine and also returned to shore.  (Coastguard report). 
©BSAC -2005   25 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
August 2005 05/442 
Humber Coastguard received a call from dive boat reporting 
having broken down, Whitby lifeboat was tasked to tow the 
vessel to shore, the vessel was able to restart its engine and 
was escorted back to shore by the lifeboat.  (Coastguard & 
RNLI reports). 
August 2005 05/221 
Two divers completed a dive to a depth of 42m.  When they 
surfaced they were not seen by their boat which moved away 
from them.  The divers sounded a horn but this was not heard.  
Once it was realised that the divers were overdue the 
Coastguard was alerted and a search involving a helicopter and 
a number of lifeboats was initiated.  After about 20 min the 
divers were spotted by the helicopter about 3 miles from their 
start point.  The divers were safely recovered into the 
helicopter. 
August 2005 05/212 
A number of divers were ascending a shotline from a dive to 
27m when a large tug was seen to be heading directly for the 
site.  The skipper of the dive boat attempted to divert the 
approaching vessel by steering towards it and by radio calls.  
The vessel did not respond and passed directly over the shot 
buoy at high speed.  One of the divers was pulled upwards and 
hit by the hull of the tug several times.  She managed to get to 
the surface after the incident and was recovered into her boat.  
She was in pain and parts of her diving equipment had been 
damaged or lost.  The pillar valve of her cylinder was bent over 
and leaking.  The Coastguard was alerted and the other divers 
recalled.  The boat headed back to the shore and was met by a 
lifeboat.  The casualty was taken ashore by the lifeboat and 
from there to hospital.  She was treated for three broken ribs, 
bruising to her lung, injuries to her arm and facial cuts. 
 
 
 
 
Boating & surface incident report source analysis 
11
59
47
BSAC Reports (11) Coastguard (59) RNLI (47)
 
 
 
August 2005 05/450 
Milford Haven Coastguard received a call from dive boat 
reporting having broken down with five divers in the water, a 
broadcast was made on behalf of the vessel, other vessels 
responded to the call, recovering the divers and towing the boat 
to shore where they were met by Dale Coastguard.  
(Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/452 
Humber Coastguard received a call from a dive support vessel 
reporting having broken down, Seahouses lifeboat and ILB 
proceeded, the vessel was towed back to shore where it was 
met by Seahouses Coastguard.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/451 
Humber Coastguard received a 999 call reporting a red flare, 
Bridlington lifeboat was tasked to investigate the report, the 
casualty was a dive support vessel broken down (out of fuel) 
with divers in the water, the vessel was towed back to shore by 
the Bridlington lifeboat.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/242 
A group of divers were recovered into their boat and the cox 
attempted to start the engine to make the return journey.  
Despite several attempts the engine could not be started.  The 
Coastguard was informed and the boat was anchored.  A 
lifeboat was on exercise nearby and came to their assistance.  
The disabled boat was towed safely ashore.  A faulty electrical 
connection was later found. 
September 2005 05/463 
Forth Coastguard received a call for a dive RHIB reporting 
having run aground in thick fog, Anstruther AWLB and inshore 
lifeboat were tasked to assist the stricken vessel with 
Carnoustie Coastguard attending, no medical assistance was 
required.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2005 05/461 
Brixham Coastguard received a call from two dive support 
vessels reporting a dangerous occurrence when a power boat 
steamed right through a dive site with divers in the water, both 
dive boats were displaying the dive flag when the power cruiser 
went right through the area in excess of 32 knots.  A Hazrep 
has been completed.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2005 05/464 
Dive RHIB contacted Portland Coastguard reporting having 
engine failure and was in danger of running aground, Poole 
lifeboat was tasked to tow the vessel to safety where they were 
met by Poole Coastguard.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2005 05/466 
Numerous 999 calls reporting a flashing torch offshore were 
investigated by Coastguard helicopter, the flashing was from a 
diver who had become lost offshore, the diver was assisted 
ashore by a swimmer and a canoeist  where they were met by 
the helicopter winchman and Wyke Coastguard.  (Coastguard 
report). 
September 2005 05/468 
Dive support vessel reported having broken down with seven 
divers in the water, another vessel recovered some of the 
divers and the parent vessel recovered the remaining, the dive 
boat was towed safely to shore by a local vessel.  (Coastguard 
report). 
September 2005 05/469 
Belfast Coastguard reported on channel 16 that they had a 
missing diver, Belfast Coastguard tasked Redbay lifeboat and 
Ballycastle Coastguard to assist in the search for the missing 
diver, the casualty was recovered safe and well shortly 
afterwards by the parent vessel.  (Coastguard report). 
26  ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
September 2005 05/471 September 2005 05/477 
Dive vessel broke down with divers aboard, Yarmouth 
Coastguard tasked Skegness lifeboat to recover the divers and 
tow the vessel to safety.  (Coastguard report). 
Brixham Coastguard were alerted to a missing diver by the 
beach manager at Breakwater Beach. Three divers entered the 
water in poor underwater visibility.  One instructor and two 
trainees, when the instructor lost the others in the party they 
panicked, the missing diver surfaced unaware of the problem, 
was safe and did not require any medical assistance.  
(Coastguard report). 
September 2005 05/472 
Portland Coastguard received a call from a dive RHIB reporting 
having broken down with one diver in the water, the dive boat 
was recovered by the Swanage lifeboat and towed back to 
shore by a fisheries protection vessel, the lifeboat recovered the 
diver unharmed.  (Coastguard report). 
 
 
 
 
 
©BSAC -2005   27 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
Ascents 
 
 
October 2004 05/316 
Clyde Coastguard received a call form dive support vessel 
reporting having two divers aboard having missed stops 
following a dive to 38m.  Following medical advice, Oban 
lifeboat recovered the divers and they were transferred to a 
waiting ambulance for transfer to hospital.  (Coastguard & RNLI 
reports). 
October 2004 05/021 
A pair of divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 32m.  
During their ascent, at a depth of 22m, the drysuit inflator of one 
of the divers stuck in the open position.  He disconnected the 
hose but was unable to prevent a buoyant ascent to the 
surface. His dive time was 22 min.   He was placed on oxygen 
and no ill effects were noted. 
November 2004 05/321 
Stornoway Coastguard received a 999 call requesting medical 
assistance for a diver having made a rapid ascent.  A medi-link 
call was made to a diving doctor and the diver was advised to 
continue oxygen for a further hour and a half, no further action.  
(Coastguard report). 
November 2004 05/023 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 35m.  One 
of the pair was underweighted and took some time to pull 
himself down the shotline against a slight current.  His buddy 
waited for him at the bottom.  Underwater visibility was 2m and 
it was dark on the wreck at 35m; both felt that they were 
suffering from nitrogen narcosis.  After 18m they stopped to 
deploy a delayed SMB.  The under-weighted diver then realised 
that he had forgotten to switch to the second cylinder of his 
twin-set.  He took the regulator from his second cylinder but 
then dropped it.  He held the SMB for the other diver to inflate.  
They launched the bag and the under-weighted diver then 
found himself ascending.  He grabbed hold of his buddy and 
gave him the reel, indicating that he should reel in.  The diver 
then realised that he had still not switched cylinders and was 
concerned that he would run out of air.  He became entangled 
in the buoy line and took hold of his buddy to try to pull himself 
down.  He was inverted and both divers were tangled in the line.  
They made a buoyant ascent to the surface missing 7 min of 
decompression stops.  Their total dive duration was 23 min.  
They were recovered into the boat and placed on oxygen.  An 
hour later no symptoms were present.  The Coastguard was 
alerted and the divers were airlifted to a recompression facility 
where they received precautionary recompression treatment. 
November 2004 05/013 
Three divers were engaged in a dive to a maximum depth of 
22m.  At 14m, 9 min into the dive, the weightbelt of one of the 
three fell off.  One of his buddies took hold of him and the diver 
became inverted.  He was unable to dump air from his suit and 
both made a buoyant ascent to the surface.  The third diver 
realised that his buddies were missing, saw the weightbelt, and 
made a normal ascent.  Once back in the boat, the diver who 
had been inverted complained of a feeling of 'pins and needles' 
and was placed on oxygen.  The Coastguard was alerted and 
the boat returned to shore, escorted by a lifeboat.  The diver 
and his buddy were taken by ambulance to hospital but no 
problems were found and both were discharged that day. 
 
 
November 2004 05/028 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 36m.  
During the ascent, at a depth of 20m, one of the pair lost control 
of his buoyancy and made a rapid ascent to the surface.  His 
dive duration was 20 min.  No subsequent ill effects were 
experienced and no further action was taken. 
December 2004 05/479 
Clyde Coastguard received a 999 call from a diver reporting his 
buddy having made a rapid ascent from 40m, Clyde Coastguard 
made a medi-link call to a diving doctor recommending 
immediate evacuation to a recompression facility, Clyde 
Coastguard requested the launch of RAF rescue helicopter, 
Cumbrae and Inverery Coastguard teams also tasked to assist.  
Casualty airlifted to a waiting ambulance for transportation to 
the chamber.  (Coastguard report). 
December 2004 05/030 
Two divers conducted a dive to a depth of 25m.  At this depth, 
one of the pair lost control of the buoyancy of her drysuit and 
made an uncontrolled ascent to the surface.  She was placed 
on oxygen.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
January 2005 05/045 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 36m.  At 
18m they lost control of their buoyancy and made a rapid 
ascent to the surface.  Their computers indicated that 4 min of 
decompression stops had been missed.  They were placed on 
oxygen.  No subsequent ill effects were reported. 
January 2005 05/076 
A trainee and two instructors entered the water to conduct 
controlled buoyant lift training.  They exchanged OK signals and 
descended to 7m.  OK signals were exchanged again and one 
of the instructors demonstrated on the other.  The trainee was 
then signalled to practice the skill.  The trainee took hold of the 
instructor to be lifted but then she spat out her mouthpiece and 
started to swim for the surface.  The other instructor caught hold 
of the student and placed his alternative air source in her 
mouth.  She would not breathe from this regulator and she 
made an uncontrolled buoyant ascent from 5m to the surface.  
She was assisted from the water.  24 hours later the trainee 
complained of dizziness and advice was sought from a 
recompression facility.  No treatment was recommended and 
she subsequently made a full recovery.  The trainee reported 
that she had been breathing an air/water mix throughout the 
dive.  The regulator was brand new and this was its first use. 
January 2005 05/038 
A pair of divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 27m.  
20 min into the dive they deployed a delayed SMB and began 
their ascent.  One diver held the reel and wound in the line, the 
other held the line above the reel.  At a depth of 17m the ascent 
rate began to increase.  The diver holding the line attempted to 
slow the ascent but the diver with the reel was unable to dump 
air from her BCD and became increasingly buoyant.  She made 
an uncontrolled ascent to the surface, her buddy deployed a 
second delayed SMB and made a normal ascent.  The buoyant 
diver was recovered into the boat and placed on oxygen.  
Medical advice was sought.  No subsequent ill effects were 
reported.  It was thought that the problem was due to the diver's 
lack of familiarity with her BCD controls. 
28  ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
January 2005 05/330 
Clyde Coastguard received a call from a dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver aboard having missed decompression 
stops.  Cumbrae Coastguard rescue team was tasked to assist 
the transfer of the casualty to a recompression chamber, and 
then on to hospital for observation.  (Coastguard report). 
February 2005 05/053 
A pair of divers was preparing to dive from an RHIB.  One of the 
pair found that his BCD inflator was stuck in the 'on' position so 
he decided to dive using his suit buoyancy alone.  They dived to 
a maximum depth of 22m.  The diver with the inflator problem 
had problems with his fin straps and had to keep adjusting 
them.  He led the dive following a compass course.  At 18m he 
stopped to adjust his fin again and, whilst doing so, began to 
ascend without realising that he was doing so.  His buddy took 
hold of him and attempted to slow the ascent.  The buoyant 
diver dumped air from his suit, but not enough.  His buddy was 
unable to prevent the diver from making an uncontrolled 
buoyant ascent to the surface.  His dive duration was 15 min.  
The buddy deployed a delayed SMB and made a normal 
ascent.  Both were recovered into the boat.  The diver who had 
made the uncontrolled ascent was given water and placed on 
oxygen.  Advice was sought from a recompression facility and 
as his time at depth had been only 12 min it was agreed that he 
should return home.  No symptoms of DCI developed. 
February 2005 05/056 
An instructor and two trainees were involved in a nitrox course.  
They descended a shotline to a depth of 16m.  One of the 
trainees was slow to descend.  On the seabed they moved 
away from the shotline and the instructor demonstrated the 
deployment of a delayed SMB.  The instructor then 
demonstrated a gas switch and each trainee in turn practiced 
the drill.  Whilst one trainee practiced the other held the SMB 
reel.  During this exercise the diver who had been slow to 
descend experienced buoyancy problems.  They then swam off 
to conduct the rest of their dive.  1 min later the instructor asked 
one of the students to repeat the gas switch drill; whilst they 
were doing so the other trainee, who had had the buoyancy 
problems, began to float to the surface.  The instructor gave 
him the SMB line to retain contact.  This trainee was carried to 
the surface.  The instructor and the second trainee made a 
normal ascent.  All were safely recovered into their boat and no 
subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
February 2005 05/059 
A diver was at his maximum depth of 9m when he lost a fin.  
This resulted in an uncontrolled ascent to the surface.  His dive 
duration was 20 min.  He was placed on oxygen for 15m.  He 
had a mild tingling in his knees and spat out some blood.  Apart 
from this he was apparently unharmed and no further action 
was reported. 
February 2005 05/077 
A diver completed a dive to a maximum depth of 38m.  She 
started her ascent and made a 4 min stop at 14m and a 3 min 
stop at 11m.  At 10m she had problems with too much 
buoyancy.  She was unable to dump more air and she made an 
uncontrolled ascent to the surface, missing an indicated 9 min 
of decompression stops.  She was recovered into the boat, 
placed on oxygen and given fluids to drink.  The Coastguard 
was alerted and a lifeboat was launched to assist.  The diver's 
buddy had completed all his stops but both were kept on 
oxygen and taken to a hyperbaric facility.  The diver who had 
made the buoyant ascent was found to be symptom-free and no 
further action was required. 
March 2005 05/043 
A diver conducted a 32 min dive to a maximum depth of 35m.  
He spent 5 min at the maximum depth and then made a slow 
ascent to 6m.  He then made a rapid ascent to the surface.  
Later he made a second dive to 34m for a total duration of 29 
min.   He spent 2 min at the maximum depth and then made a 
slow ascent to 6m.  At a depth of 24m he began to experience 
problems with buoyancy control and he realised that the cuff 
dump of his drysuit was jammed.  He dumped all the air from 
his drysuit and used his BCD to control his buoyancy.  He lost 
control of his buoyancy at 6m and made a rapid ascent to the 
surface.  He later realised that the faulty cuff dump had been 
the cause of his first buoyant ascent.  He was taken to a 
recompression facility from treatment, but no symptoms of DCI 
were reported. 
March 2005 05/097 
Two divers were at a depth of 35m when the regulator of one of 
the pair started to free flow.  He went for his buddy's alternative 
air source but the buddy's regulator began to free flow too.  
They made a fast ascent to the surface.  Their dive duration 
was 11 min.  The water temperature was 4 deg C.  They were 
given oxygen as a precaution but no subsequent ill effects were 
experienced. 
March 2005 05/065 
A diver conducted a 38 min dive to 26m with a 5 min stop at 
6m.  2 hours 10 min later he dived to 22m and stayed at this 
depth for about 15 min.  He became very cold and, with his two 
buddies, he ascended to 12m.  At this depth he lost control of 
his buoyancy and rose to the surface.  He re-descended to join 
his buddies.  They continued the dive.  They rose to 6m where 
they stayed for 5 min and then surfaced.  The following day this 
diver complained of a pain in his shoulder and was advised to 
seek advice from a recompression facility.  He was 
recompressed but the conclusion was that the pain was due to 
an old injury.  The diver thought that his undersuit had provided 
more buoyancy than he had planned for. 
March 2005 05/067 
During the ascent from a dive, one of a pair of divers lost a fin.  
They subsequently lost control of their buoyancy and made a 
rapid ascent to the surface.  The Coastguard was alerted and a 
doctor on a nearby boat was able to assist them and provide 
them with oxygen.  A lifeboat and a helicopter were tasked to 
assist.  The divers were airlifted to a recompression facility for 
treatment.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
March 2005 05/068 
Three divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 22m.  At 
the end of the dive one of the three started to deploy a delayed 
SMB.  During this process she realised that she only had 50 bar 
remaining and the SMB deployment was abandoned.  She then 
realised that she was underweighted and attempted to pick up 
some rocks to compensate.  Whilst doing so she ran out of air.  
She was unable to use her buddy's alternative air source and 
she swam towards the surface.  One of her buddies went with 
her.  They were recovered into their boat and placed on oxygen.  
The Coastguard was alerted and medical advice was sought.  
Both divers were airlifted to a recompression facility but no 
treatment was found to be necessary.  The third diver surfaced 
normally. 
March 2005 05/098 
Two divers dived to a maximum depth of 35m.  They were just 
about to start their ascent when one of the pair swallowed some 
water.  This caused her to panic and she made a rapid ascent 
to the surface.  Her dive duration was 23 min.  She was taken 
©BSAC -2005   29 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
by ambulance to hospital from where she was discharged 3 
hours later with no subsequent ill effects. 
March 2005 05/105 
A pair of divers descended to 11m at which point one of the 
divers' regulators began to free flow.  There was some 
confusion and they made a rapid ascent to the surface.  At the 
surface, the diver with the free flow then had difficulties with his 
BCD and called for help.  This diver's computer was also 
discovered to have failed during the dive.  The water 
temperature was 6 deg C.  No subsequent ill effects were 
reported. 
March 2005 05/107 
Three divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 25m.  At 
24m one of the three became too buoyant and partially inverted.  
The other two divers managed to right her and make her 
neutrally buoyant.  One of the other divers then deployed a 
delayed SMB and they began their ascent.  Again the diver 
became buoyant and she hung onto the buoy line to slow her 
ascent.  This began to drag the diver holding the reel upwards 
so he released some line.  The buoyant diver then made an 
uncontrolled, rapid ascent to the surface.  The others made a 
normal ascent.  The buoyant diver was placed on oxygen and 
the boat returned to shore.  Once ashore they contacted the 
Coastguard and an ambulance was called.  The diver was 
taken to hospital but released without problem some hours 
later.  This diver had a new thick undersuit and it is thought that 
this may have blocked the drysuit dump valve.   She now uses 
ankle weights 
March 2005 05/341 
Portland Coastguard was contacted by Harbourmaster 
expressing concern for a female diver who had made an ascent 
from 20m but having held her breath during the last 4m.  A 
paramedic examined the diver requesting an airlift to evacuate 
the diver to a recompression chamber for treatment.  The 
casualty was taken out to sea by Lyme Regis lifeboat.  The 
landing site and incident attended by Poole, Wyke and Lyme 
Coastguard.  (Coastguard report). 
March 2005 05/081 
Two divers conducted a wreck dive to a maximum depth of 
22m.  After 20 min they ascended to a depth of 10m.  After a 
further 10 min they prepared to deploy a delayed SMB.  Whilst 
doing so, one of the divers developed cramp in her right leg and 
started to panic a little.  Their situation was exacerbated by an 
increasing surge in the water.  The diver with cramp let go of 
the wreck to attend to the problem and she was carried 
buoyantly towards the surface.  Her buddy caught hold of her at 
a depth of 3m and managed to swim back down to 7m.  The 
diver with cramp was unable to get her drysuit dump valve to 
release any air and her buddy could not hold on to her.  She 
made a rapid buoyant ascent to the surface.  Her buddy 
followed.  Their total dive time was 32 min.  They were 
recovered into the boat and placed on oxygen.  The Coastguard 
was alerted and  the boat returned to shore having recovered 
two other pairs of divers.  Once ashore further medical advice 
was sought and the divers were taken to a recompression 
facility.  The diver who had had cramp had a slight ache in her 
right elbow and her buddy  had a slight tingling in his feet.  Both 
divers were given a precautionary recompression treatment, 
although it was later concluded that neither had suffered a DCI. 
March 2005 05/082 
A diver dived to a maximum depth of 31m.  He then followed a 
sloping seabed upwards.  Whilst swimming up the slope the 
diver began to become too buoyant.  At 20m he was unable to 
dump more air and he made a buoyant ascent to the surface.  
Another diver helped him to the shore and it was found that he 
had missed a 2 min decompression stop.  He was placed on 
oxygen and the Coastguard was alerted.  The diver was taken 
by helicopter to a recompression facility and kept on oxygen for 
6 hours.  No treatment was required.  It was later found that the 
diver was underweighted and that a new undersuit had caught 
in the dump valve. 
April 2005 05/344 
Portland Coastguard received a call from dive boat reporting 
having a diver aboard who had made a rapid ascent from 27m.  
Coastguard rescue helicopter R-IJ was tasked to airlift the diver 
and transport to the HLS where they were met by Poole 
Coastguard and an ambulance.  (Coastguard report). 
April 2005 05/289 
Two divers descended a line to a depth of 20m.  They then 
swam mid-water following a compass bearing.  As they swam 
they descended deeper than intended to a depth of 32m.  They 
then re-ascended to 24m and continued.  They swam towards a 
cliff wall and this caused a panic attack in one of the divers, 
which he believed was due to narcosis.  He swam up the cliff to 
a depth of 12m at which point he tried to regain control.  He 
dumped air and started to sink, he then re-inflated his BCD and 
rose to the surface, hyperventilating all the way.  His buddy had 
lost contact with him and he too came to the surface faster than 
normal.  At the surface the diver who had been panicked felt 
dizzy and had a headache.  He was recovered from the water, 
placed on oxygen and given fluids.  The buddy was also placed 
on oxygen.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
 
April 2005 05/108 
Two divers conducted a dive to a depth of 22m.  One of the 
divers developed buoyancy problems and made an uncontrolled 
ascent to the surface.  He was given oxygen as a precaution.  
No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
April 2005 05/110 
Three divers descended to a depth of 35m.  One of the three 
developed a problem with his mask and made a rapid ascent to 
the surface.  He was placed on oxygen and an ambulance was 
called.  He suffered no ill effects and was not taken to hospital. 
April 2005 05/176 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 25m.  It 
was cold and dark at depth, one diver was nervous and both 
were breathing heavily.  After 20 min, the dive leader gave the 
ascend signal and held onto some wreckage whilst deploying a 
delayed SMB.  On letting go of the wreckage the diver began to 
ascend rapidly and his buddy followed.  Both made a rapid 
ascent directly to the surface.  Their dive duration was 25 min.  
Both were recovered into their boat and one of the pair was 
given oxygen.  No further action was reported. 
April 2005 05/291 
Two divers undertook their first freshwater dive.  They swam to 
a platform to make their descent.  One of the divers was tired 
and cold by the time they reached the platform.  As they started 
their descent the visibility was low and the diver who was tired 
became very uncomfortable and signalled for her buddy to get 
closer to her.  She then started to hyperventilate.  She signalled 
to her buddy to ascend but they were heavy and sinking.  Her 
buddy signalled for her to inflate her BCD but she did not do so.  
The buddy swam down to her and took hold of her.  He inflated 
his BCD and the descent stopped at about 15m.  They then 
30  ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
started a fast ascent.  The buddy dumped too much air and they 
started to sink again.  This cycle was repeated.  The troubled 
diver then accidentally released the buddy's weightbelt.  The 
buddy did not realise this and decided to put air into his BCD to 
bring them to the surface.  They made a rapid ascent to the 
surface, where the buddy gave the emergency signal.  They 
were recovered from the water.  Neither diver suffered any 
subsequent ill effect. 
April 2005 05/113 
Two divers descended to a depth of 21m.  At this point one of 
the divers' regulators began to free flow.  She made a fast 
ascent to the surface.  Her dive duration was 5 min.  At the 
surface she ditched her BCD and cylinder.  She was recovered 
from the water and placed on oxygen.  No subsequent ill effects 
were experienced.  The water temperature was 8 deg C. 
April 2005 05/118 
Two divers dived to a maximum depth of 27m.  When they 
started their ascent one of the pair had 100 bar remaining in a 
12l cylinder.  They ascended to 12m at which point this diver 
ran out of air.  He took his buddy's pony regulator and they 
continued  up to 6m.  One of their computers indicated 7 min to 
surface.  The diver who was out of air then lost control of his 
buoyancy.  The other diver dumped air but was unable to 
prevent them from being carried to the surface.  One of their 
computers indicated that 3 min of stops had been missed.  
Their dive duration was 35 min.  They were recovered into the 
boat and monitored.  No subsequent ill effects were reported. 
April 2005 05/117 
Two divers dived to a maximum depth of 22m.  They tried to 
deploy a delayed SMB to make their ascent but had problems 
doing so.  One of the pair was low on air and had difficulty with 
their ascent.  At 3m this diver lost their regulator and exhaled 
for the rest of the ascent, which was rapid.  Their dive duration 
was 15 min.  At the surface this diver was distressed.  They 
were both given oxygen.  No subsequent ill effects were 
reported. 
April 2005 05/115 
A pair of divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 22m.  
They made their ascent by following a sloping contour towards 
the surface.  At 12m one of the divers lost control of his 
buoyancy and took hold of his buddy.  Both divers then made a 
rapid buoyant ascent to the surface.  Their dive duration was 27 
min.  Both were placed on oxygen.  No subsequent ill effects 
were experienced. 
April 2005 05/114 
Two divers descended to a depth of 20m.  At this point one of 
the divers' regulators began to free flow.  He made a fast ascent 
to the surface.  His dive duration was 7 min.  He was placed on 
oxygen.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced.  The 
water temperature was 8 deg C. 
April 2005 05/090 
A pair of newly qualified divers was conducting a dive to a 
maximum depth of 13m.  18 min into their dive they moved over 
an underwater obstacle at a depth of 9m.  At this point one of 
the pair lost control of his buoyancy and began to rise to the 
surface.  He was attached to his buddy by a buddy line and, 
despite the buddy's efforts to stop the ascent, they were both 
carried to the surface.  The divers left the water and were 
monitored for symptoms but none were reported. 
 
April 2005 05/192 
Two divers were conducting a dive.  One diver's computer read 
18m and the other's 23m.  One of the pair panicked and rushed 
for the surface.  He was wearing a semi-drysuit and was 
suffering from mild hypothermia.  The water temperature was 5 
deg C.  He was placed on oxygen.  He suffered no subsequent 
ill effects. 
April 2005 05/120 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 17m.  One 
of the pair was too buoyant and picked up a large rock to 
compensate.  At the end of the dive, whilst deploying a delayed 
SMB, the pair made an uncontrolled ascent to the surface.  
Their dive duration was 27 min.  They were recovered into the 
boat and placed on oxygen.  The Coastguard was alerted.  The 
divers were monitored for symptoms but no further action was 
required. 
April 2005 05/171 
Three divers were conducting a dive to a maximum depth of 
18m.  One swam ahead of his buddies.  Then both his main and 
his octopus regulators began to free flow.  He made a fast 
ascent to the surface still breathing from one of his regulators.  
His dive duration was 10 min.  He was assisted from the water 
and placed on oxygen.  He suffered no ill effects. 
May 2005 05/121 
A diver conducted a dive to a depth of 30m.  Towards the end 
of the dive he deployed a delayed SMB.  Whilst doing so he 
began to ascend.  He had reached 15m by the time he had 
controlled his ascent.  He only had 40 bar remaining.  He 
ascended to his decompression stop by which time he was 
down to 20 bar.  He realised that he did not have enough air to 
complete the stop safely so he ascended to the surface having 
missed a 1 min stop.  His dive duration was 28 min.  He was 
placed on oxygen.  No symptoms developed and no further 
action was taken. 
May 2005 05/353 
Dive support vessel reported having two divers aboard having 
made a rapid ascent while deploying the delayed SMB.  The 
divers were administered oxygen and then nitrox after the 
oxygen was exhausted.  Medical advice was sought from 
DDRC, the advice was to monitor the divers, no recompression 
treatment necessary.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2005 05/356 
Portland Coastguard received a call from dive boat reporting 
having a diver aboard who had made a rapid ascent following a 
problem in deploying her delayed SMB.  The casualty was 
recovered by Coastguard rescue helicopter R-WB, with Dorset 
police RHIB also in attendance.  The helicopter was met at the 
HLS by Poole Coastguard, the police, and a waiting ambulance 
for transporting to the chamber.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2005 05/194 
A diver under training conducted a 20 min dive to 29m.  Over 4 
hours later he dived to 18m.  During this dive he began to feel 
dizzy, he inflated his BCD and made a fast ascent to the 
surface.  His dive time was 11 min.  He was placed on oxygen 
and experienced no subsequent ill effects. 
May 2005 05/131 
Three divers descended to a wreck at a depth of 20m.  One of 
the divers became inverted and her feet came out of her drysuit 
boots leaving her without the use of her fins.  She hung onto the 
©BSAC -2005   31 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
wreck.  Her buddies righted her but were unable to get her feet 
back into her boots because of the water pressure.  The diver 
was unable to fin and one of her buddies started to assist her to 
the surface.  He failed to inflate her BCD since he pressed the 
button on her audible alarm in error.  He then used his own 
buoyancy to make the ascent.  At 9m they lost control of their 
buoyancy and made a rapid ascent to the surface, missing 1 
min of decompression.  The third diver followed at a more 
normal rate.  The group was recovered into their boat and the 
two who had made a rapid ascent were placed on oxygen.  No 
subsequent ill effects were experienced and no further action 
was taken. 
May 2005 05/193 
A diver completed a 16 min dive to 7m.  1 hour later he dived to 
7m for 11 min.  About 90 min later he dived again, with two 
others, to 20m.  During this dive he started to cough and water 
entered his mask, this caused him to panic and he made a fast 
ascent to the surface. One of this buddies tried to control the 
ascent.  Both divers were given oxygen.  No subsequent ill 
effects were experienced. 
May 2005 05/364 
Following a 'Pan Pan' call from dive support vessel, Humber 
Coastguard tasked RAF rescue helicopter R-131 to airlift two 
divers from the vessel for transportation to recompression 
chamber for treatment following a rapid ascent.  Assisted by 
Amble and Hull Coastguard teams. The casualties were finally 
transported to the recompression chamber by ambulance.  
(Coastguard report). 
May 2005 05/142 
Two divers were ascending from a dive to a maximum depth of 
30m.  At 12m one of the pair prepared a delayed SMB for 
deployment.  He was using a rebreather and he used the 
rebreather's alternative regulator as the air source.  He had to 
twist this regulator around to get it to fit into the buoy.  When he 
operated the regulator valve he felt himself begin to rise.  He 
dumped air from the rebreather through his nose but this did not 
stop the ascent.  He released the buoy and confirmed that his 
drysuit was fully vented.  Soon he was unable to breath from 
the rebreather and he switched to the open circuit alternative air 
source.  He ascended from 12m to the surface in 1 min.  He 
was recovered into the boat and started to breath 70% oxygen 
from his rebreather.  This became uncomfortable and he 
stopped.  No symptoms were experienced and no further action 
was taken.  He subsequently believes that he had partially 
inflated the rebreather's wing whilst trying to inflate the buoy. 
May 2005 05/264 
Two divers completed a 36 min dive to 21m.  4 hours later they 
dived to 17m.  During this dive one of the pair noticed her 
weightbelt was slipping and she settled onto the seabed to 
resolve the problem.  Her buddy held the weightbelt on to her 
while she attempted to adjust it.  The silt became stirred up and 
the diver with the loose belt began to panic a little.  She 
signalled that she wanted to ascend.  Her buddy held onto the 
diver and her weightbelt and they began to ascend.  At 8m the 
ascent stopped and the buddy put air into his suit and BCD to 
restart the ascent.  The ascent became rapid and they rose 
directly to the surface.  They were recovered into their boat and 
placed on oxygen.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
May 2005 05/260 
A diver conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 35m.  He 
deployed a delayed SMB to make his ascent but when he got to 
11m he realised that the SMB had been inadequately inflated  
 
and he had to redeploy it.  At 6m he had 6 min of 
decompression to complete and only 50 bar in his main 
cylinder.  He prepared his pony cylinder but discovered that the 
regulator had become disconnected and the A clamp screw was 
missing.  He completed 4 min of decompression and then 
surfaced with 10 bar remaining.  Once back on the boat he was 
sick.  He thought this was due to inhaling diesel fumes.  He was 
placed on oxygen for 10 min.  No symptoms developed and no 
further action was taken. 
May 2005 05/200 
Two divers were on a training course at a depth of 21m when 
one of the pair lost 4 kg of weight from the pocket of her 
integrated weight system.  She made a rapid ascent to the 
surface.  Her dive duration was 10 min.  She was placed on 
oxygen.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
May 2005 05/177 
Two divers entered the water to dive on a wreck at a maximum 
depth of 37m.  They planned a no-stop dive but agreed that 
they might extend the dive time if conditions were favourable.  
During the dive they extended the dive to 20 min resulting in a 
requirement for 5 min decompression at 3m.  At the end of the 
dive they deployed a delayed SMB and began their ascent.  
One of the divers dumped air from her drysuit at the beginning 
of the ascent and this made her negatively buoyant.  She had to 
fin hard to ascend.  Her buddy indicated that she should put 
some air into her suit but narcosis prevented her from doing so.  
At the start of the ascent she had 100 bar in a 12l cylinder.  By 
the time she reached 30m her contents gauge indicated 50 bar 
and she began to panic.  Her buddy put some air into her 
drysuit to assist her.   At 28m the buddy made his octopus 
regulator available.  The negatively buoyant diver ran out of air 
and took the buddy's main regulator; he switched to his octopus 
regulator.  The regulator hoses were twisted and they attempted 
to swap but ended up with the buddy using his octopus 
regulator again.  14 min of decompression requirements were 
indicated by the buddy's computer.  The buddy took the 
decision to go straight to the surface and they rose to the 
surface from 28m in 1 min.  Their total dive duration was 29 
min.  At the surface they gave the emergency signal and were 
quickly recovered into their boat.  Both divers were given 
oxygen and fluids.  Once ashore they were taken to hospital by 
ambulance.  No symptoms were experienced and they were 
discharged later that day. 
May 2005 05/296 
A diver conducted a dive to 43m using nitrox 25.  After 23 min 
he ascended to 6m to conduct a 3 min stop.  He then 
experienced buoyancy problems and started to rise.  He went 
back down to 8m and re-ascended but he started to rise again.  
He surfaced having missed a 22 min stop at 3m.  He was 
recovered into the boat and placed on oxygen.  The Coastguard 
was alerted and the diver was airlifted to a recompression 
facility.  He was given precautionary recompression therapy but 
suffered no symptoms of DCI. 
June 2005 05/202 
An instructor and a trainee were involved in an advanced 
training session at a depth of 35m.  The trainee became 
unsure, grabbed the instructor and made for the surface.  The 
instructor attempted to control the ascent but they rose faster 
than normal to the surface.  Both divers were placed on oxygen.  
No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
June 2005 05/182 
Two divers conducted a wreck dive to a maximum depth of 
32  ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
38m.  During the dive the pair became separated.  One diver 
suffered a free flow and was assisted by two other divers.  The 
other member of the pair looked around for his buddy and then 
made his way back up the wreck.  At 17m he deployed a 
delayed SMB.  The reel jammed and the diver made a rapid 
ascent to the surface missing a planned safety stop.  At the 
surface he saw his boat engaged in recovering his buddy and 
two other divers.  He was recovered into the boat.  He felt 
seasick.  He was airlifted to a recompression facility with the 
other three divers and given precautionary recompression 
treatment.  (Report 05/181 relates). 
June 2005 05/181 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 38m.  
They worked their way around a wreck and, at a depth of 30m, 
one of the pair had a contents gauge reading 50 bar held in 
front of him.  Initially he thought that it was his buddy but then 
discovered that it was a diver from another pair in his dive 
group.  He gave this diver his octopus regulator.  The diver had 
become separated from his buddy and had then suffered a 
regulator free flow.  The air donor's buddy then turned him 
round to show him that his weightbelt had come off and he was 
holding it in his hand.  The action of turning him round pulled 
the regulator from the other diver's mouth; this diver started to 
panic.  The diver who was giving the air replaced the 
mouthpiece in the diver's mouth and calmed him down.  His 
own buddy then turned him back again, he too was in a state of 
panic having had his regulator knocked from his mouth by the 
panicking diver.  The diver giving air replaced his buddy's 
regulator.  They had been ascending slowly and at 15m the 
donor diver had dumped all the air from his suit but he was 
unable to get the other divers to control their buoyancy and they 
made a rapid ascent to the surface missing decompression 
stops.  The dive duration of the original dive pair was 12 min.  
The three divers were recovered into their boat and placed on 
oxygen.  The Coastguard was alerted and the divers were 
airlifted to a recompression facility where they were given 
precautionary recompression treatment.  None of the divers 
developed any symptom of DCI.  (Report 05/182 relates). 
 
June 2005 05/379 
Following a dive to 32m one diver ran out of air and made a 
rapid ascent, both divers surfacing together, 45min after the 
ascent the vessel called Portland Coastguard and a medi-link 
call was established with a diving doctor, the doctor advised 
that the treatment given, oxygen, was appropriate.  (Coastguard 
report). 
June 2005 05/204 
A diver conducted a 40 min dive to a depth of 22m.  3 hours 
later he dived to 20m.  Prior to the second dive he had removed 
an undersuit but did not adjust his buoyancy.  During the ascent 
from the second dive he became positively buoyant and 
struggled to control his ascent.  His buddy held on to him to 
help slow the ascent but, at 3m, he had to let go of him.  The 
buoyant diver rose quickly to the surface.  His computer 
indicated a fast ascent and went into emergency mode.  His 
dive duration was 40 min.  The diver was monitored for signs of 
DCI but none were experienced. 
June 2005 05/162 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 22m.  
Towards the end of the dive they had ascended to 14m.  At this 
point one of the pair became too buoyant.  She attempted to 
dump air from her drysuit but none was released.  She was 
unable to prevent herself being carried to the surface.  Her dive 
duration was 34 min.  She was placed on oxygen and the 
Coastguard was alerted.  After recovering her buddy the boat 
returned to shore and the diver was taken by ambulance to a 
recompression facility.  No signs of DCI were found and the 
diver was discharged within 2 hours. 
June 2005 05/390 
Following a rapid ascent from 14m.  Solent Coastguard took 
medical advice, both being taken to QAH for oxygen therapy.  
(Coastguard report). 
June 2005 05/386 
Falmouth Coastguard received a call from dive RHIB reporting 
having a diver aboard who had made a rapid ascent from 19m, 
the diver was medi-linked with a diving doctor who 
recommended he be seen at A&E with continuous oxygen to be 
administered. The casualty was met by land ambulance and 
transported to hospital.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2005 05/261 
A diver conducted a dive to 36m for 35 min including an 8 min 
stop at 6m.  24 hours later he dived to 45m.  During his ascent 
from this dive he lost control of his buoyancy and rose to the 
surface missing about 30 min of decompression stops.  He was 
placed on oxygen and airlifted to a recompression facility.  He 
was given precautionary recompression treatment.  No 
subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
June 2005 05/393 
Dive charter vessel reported to Falmouth Coastguard having 
two divers aboard having made a rapid ascent, medical advice 
was obtained and the vessel advised to return to shore, give 
100% oxygen for 1 hour and seek medical advice with GP.  
(Coastguard report). 
June 2005 05/397 
Brixham Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting a diver having made a rapid ascent from 8m, the max 
depth was 25m for 19 min.  The parent vessel had divers in the 
water, another RHIB took the casualty to QAB for transportation 
to DDRC.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2005 05/398 
Solent Coastguard received a call from dive vessel reporting 
having two divers aboard who had made a rapid ascent from 
30m, both divers missed 9 min of stops.  The divers were 
airlifted from the vessel by Coastguard helicopter R-I and 
transported to QAH for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/309 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 35m.  
During the ascent one of the pair's SMB became entangled with 
another and he was dragged to the surface missing 3 min of 
decompression stops.  His buddy was using a rebreather and 
he experienced buoyancy control problems at 25m and made a 
buoyant ascent to the surface missing 27 min of stops.  The 
divers were placed on oxygen and the Coastguard was alerted.  
The divers were airlifted to a recompression facility where they 
received precautionary recompression treatment. 
July 2005 05/298 
Two divers descended to a wreck in a maximum depth of 29m.  
At 20m one of the pair panicked and ascended to the surface in 
20 seconds.  His buddy descended to the wreck, waited 3 min 
and then made a normal ascent to the surface.  No subsequent 
ill effects were experienced. 
 
©BSAC -2005   33 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
July 2005 05/405 
Solent Coastguard received a call from dive vessel reporting 
having a diver aboard having missed 5 min of stops, medical 
advice was sought and it was advised the diver be airlifted to 
recompression chamber for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/157 
Four divers were placed on oxygen and airlifted to a 
recompression facility for treatment after they made a rapid 
ascent from 37m with a dive duration of 25 min. 
July 2005 05/412 
Holyhead received a call from a diving RHIB reporting having 
two divers aboard having made a rapid ascent from 24m 
missing all stops, both divers were air evacuated to a 
recompression chamber, Porth Dinllaen prepared the HLS.  
(Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/175 
Two divers planned a dive to a maximum depth of 29m.  One of 
the divers was using a twin set with twin regulators.  One of the 
regulators free flowed when switched on and again in the water.  
The problem then appeared to be resolved and they 
descended.  The diver who had had the regulator problem 
experienced excessive air consumption although no escaping 
air was seen.  Towards the end of the dive this diver was on 90 
bar and his buddy on 120 bar.  4 min later the diver suddenly 
ran out of air.  He gave an 'out of air' signal and his buddy gave 
him her main regulator and switched to her pony regulator.  
There was busy boat traffic and they stopped to deploy a 
delayed SMB.  The diver who was out of air struggled to ascend 
and stopped his attempts to reel in the SMB line.  They then 
made a rapid ascent to the surface missing a planned 3 min 
safety stop at 6m.  They were recovered into their boat and 
placed on oxygen.  They reported the incident to the 
Coastguard and on return to shore they sought specialist 
medical advice by phone.  No symptoms of DCI developed and 
no further action was taken.  The diver who had been out of air 
complained of a sore ear. 
July 2005 05/183 
Two divers, using nitrox 32, had completed a dive to a 
maximum depth of 31m and were making their ascent using a 
delayed SMB.  At a depth of around 22m a third diver, who was 
unknown to them, appeared from below them and swum up 
past them and ascended their SMB line.  This diver was trailing 
an un-inflated SMB attached to his BCD by a line.  The two 
divers continued up to 6m.  One of the pair felt the SMB line 
being pulled upwards.  The third diver then reappeared 
swimming back down the line.  The divers had to pay out line to 
prevent them being dragged down.  The pair signalled to the 
third diver to re-ascend but when he was 4m below them he 
released the line and drifted off and down.  The pair settled at 
6m, sorted out their SMB line and commenced their 
decompression stop.  They then spotted a mass of bubbles and 
moved over to them, one of the pair descended slightly and 
found the third diver at around 14m.  The other diver of the pair 
only had 50 bar remaining and stayed at 6m.  The diver from 
the pair saw that the part inflated SMB was still attached to the 
third diver, she released this and brought him to the surface 
using a controlled buoyant lift, her buddy joined them and 
ascended with them.  Their dive duration was 38 min including 
a 4 min stop at 6m.  They were recovered into their boat and 
the third diver was then transferred to his own boat.  The third 
diver had been one of another pair of divers, who were also 
using nitrox 32, and diving to a depth of 31m.  During the 
ascent, at a depth of 16m, the third diver's buddy began a 
buoyant ascent.  He was unable to dump air from his suit and 
he rose rapidly to the surface.  His computer indicated missed 
stops.  He was placed on oxygen.  When the third diver 
surfaced his computer also indicated missed stops.  He too was 
placed on oxygen and the Coastguard was alerted.  The 
indications were that the third diver had missed 10 min of stops 
and his buddy had missed 34 min of stops.  The third diver had 
been holding on to the SMB line when his buddy started to 
ascend.  He had been dragged up to 8m before he let go and 
then he dropped back down to 20m before starting to re-
ascend.  He had tried to deploy a delayed SMB but started to 
panic and failed to do so.  He was then found by the first pair of 
divers and assisted to the surface.  The divers who had missed 
stops were taken by ambulance to a recompression facility.  
Neither displayed any symptoms of DCI but both were given 
precautionary recompression treatment.  It was found that the 
BCD inflation valve of the diver who had made the buoyant 
ascent had been slowly leaking causing his BCD, which he did 
not normally use, to inflate. 
July 2005 05/414 
Portland Coastguard received a call from dive vessel reporting 
having a diver aboard who had made a rapid ascent from 7m 
following a dive to 35m, all stops missed, Coastguard rescue 
helicopter R-WB airlifted the casualty to Poole where they were 
met by Poole Coastguard and an ambulance for transportation 
to the chamber.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/416 
Dive boat reported to Portland Coastguard having a diver 
aboard having missed stops following a dive to 20m.  A medi-
link call was established, the diver was airlifted by Coastguard 
rescue helicopter R-WB, being met by Poole Coastguard and 
ambulance  for transportation to chamber.  (Coastguard report). 
July 2005 05/206 
A diver conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 18m.  During 
the dive a weight fell out of one of his weight pouches.  The 
diver was unable to prevent an uncontrolled ascent from 6m to 
the surface.  His dive duration was 30 min.  The diver had 
experienced a similar problem with the weight on two other 
occasions.  No subsequent ill effects were reported. 
July 2005 05/184 
Two divers made a dive to a maximum depth of 17m.  One of 
the pair had difficulty clearing his ears and they took some time 
to descend the shotline.  After 35 min they attempted to deploy 
a delayed SMB to make their ascent.  However the reel jammed 
and after failed attempts to clear it they abandoned it.  At 12m 
one of the pair lost control of his buoyancy and rose rapidly to 
the surface, his buddy followed at a faster than normal rate.  At 
the surface the diver who had made the rapid ascent was found 
to be dazed and with a bleeding nose.  He was recovered into 
the boat and placed on oxygen.  The boat returned to shore and 
the emergency services were alerted.  The diver was airlifted to 
a recompression facility where he received a precautionary 
recompression treatment. 
August 2005 05/230 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 30m.  At 
the end of the dive they deployed a delayed SMB and started 
their ascent.  At 25m one of the pair was beginning to rise 
rapidly.  At 20m he turned and swam down to his buddy who 
grabbed hold of him and checked that his dump valve was 
open.  The buddy made himself negative and held them both at 
24m.  The buoyant diver was breathing heavily and the SMB 
line had become tangled in his equipment.  Whilst trying to free 
it the reel spindle broke.  The buddy cut the lines and discarded 
the reel.  The pair had sunk back down to 28m.  The buddy 
checked the buoyant diver's contents gauge and it read 25 bar.  
34  ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
The buddy gave the buoyant diver his pony regulator and they 
made a controlled ascent to the surface.  Their dive duration 
was 34 min.  Both divers were safely recovered into their boat 
and no subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
August 2005 05/210 
Two divers completed a 35 min dive to a depth of 16m with a 3 
min stop at 6m.  3 hours later they conducted a drift dive to a 
maximum depth of 15m.  One of the divers spotted a lobster 
and swam down to it.  He gave the SMB reel to his buddy who 
found difficulty staying stationary with his buddy due to the 
current.  The first diver was delayed trying to release a bag in 
which to place the lobster.  The buddy was carried away by the 
current and had to swim very hard to get back.  As he got back 
to the first diver he reached out for him and knocked the 
regulator from his mouth.  The first diver refitted his alternative 
air source.  The buddy gave the other diver the reel and 
immediately began an ascent, still breathing very hard.  At the 
surface he inflated his suit and BCD and tried to use the SMB 
for more buoyancy.  The other diver surfaced soon afterwards 
and put more air into his BCD.  They were recovered into the 
boat and the diver who had made the rapid ascent was placed 
on oxygen.  No subsequent ill effects were reported. 
August 2005 05/234 
Two divers undertook a dive to a maximum depth of 39m.  They 
started to ascend a boulder slope and, at about 25m, one of the 
pair started to inhale seawater.  She tried to keep calm and she 
swallowed some of the water.  She then took her buddy's 
alternative air source.  The pair started to ascend but the 
troubled diver still felt water in her throat and was still 
distressed.  At about 20m she dropped the alternative air 
source and made a rapid, free ascent to the surface.  She 
breathed out during the ascent.  Her buddy went after her and 
arrived at the surface shortly afterwards.  Their total dive 
duration was 22 min and they had risen to the surface from 25m 
in about 40 seconds.  They missed a 2 min decompression 
stop.  They were placed on oxygen and the boat returned to 
shore.  They were taken by ambulance to a recompression 
facility and received precautionary recompression treatment.  
Neither diver suffered any ill effects. 
August 2005 05/436 
Dive support vessel reported to Brixham Coastguard that they 
had a diver aboard who had dived to 31m and upon ascent had 
made a rapid ascent from 15m.  Medical advice was obtained 
from DDRC Plymouth, the diver had been given oxygen and the 
diver remained on the vessel with no further treatment required, 
was advised not to dive again for a period of 48 hours.  
(Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/437 
Dive support vessel contacted Portland Coastguard reporting 
having three divers aboard who had made a rapid ascent from 
10m following a dive to 33m, medical advice was sought which 
recommended evacuation, Portland Coastguard tasked 
Coastguard rescue helicopter to airlift the casualties from the 
vessel to the HLS where an ambulance and Poole Coastguard 
were waiting to transport the divers to the hyperbaric chamber 
for treatment.  (Coastguard report). 
 
August 2005 05/438 
A diver made a rapid ascent from 41m.  The dive max depth 
was 42m, the diver suffered a panic attack and ascended to 
36m only to descend to 40m when the rapid ascent occurred, 
the diver was recovered to the support craft and airlifted to 
recompression chamber by RAF rescue helicopter R-131 the 
helicopter was met by an ambulance and Humber Coastguard. 
(Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/266 
A trainee diver conducted a 30 min dive to a depth of 10m.  2 
hours later she dived again.  With her buddy she made a rapid 
descent to 22m followed by an increasingly rapid ascent to the 
surface.  They arrived at the surface with computer warnings 
activated.  One of the divers was suffering from sore ears and a 
slight nose bleed.  She was given oxygen and advised to seek 
medical advise if she experienced subsequent problems. 
August 2005 05/439 
Dive support vessel reported having picked up a diver from 
another vessel who had made a rapid ascent from 27.9m, 
Portland Coastguard tasked Coastguard rescue helicopter R-
WB to airlift the casualty from the vessel to shore for onward 
transportation to recompression chamber, the HLS was 
prepared by Poole Coastguard, the casualty was transferred to 
a waiting ambulance.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/268 
A trainee and an instructor were diving at a maximum depth of 
9m.  The trainee deployed a delayed SMB.  Whilst doing so he  
lost control of his buoyancy and they made a rapid ascent to the 
surface.  They were placed on oxygen.  No subsequent ill 
effects were reported. 
August 2005 05/271 
Three divers conducted a drift dive to a maximum depth of 31m.  
They gradually ascended to a depth of 9m where they deployed 
a delayed SMB.  At this point one of the divers was having 
problems controlling his buoyancy and he made a buoyant 
ascent to the surface.  His buddies made a normal ascent.  The 
buoyant diver was placed on oxygen for 10 min.  No symptoms 
developed and no further action was taken. 
August 2005 05/222 
An instructor and two trainees conducted a dive to a maximum 
depth of 20m.  Towards the end of the dive, in a depth of 6m, 
they stopped to conduct air sharing drills.  During the drill one of 
the trainees took the octopus regulator of the other trainee.  He 
put it in his mouth but was unable to get air from it.  The 
instructor gave him his own octopus regulator but the trainee 
still had problems.  The instructor purged the regulator but this 
did not solve the problem.  The trainee became panicked and 
rushed to the surface.  The instructor went with him and the 
other trainee followed.  Once at the surface the trainee rapidly 
recovered.  It was subsequently found that the first octopus 
regulator had a guard fitted to it that had not been present in the 
pre-dive checks and which had prevented the diver from getting 
air. 
August 2005 05/453 
Solent Coastguard received a call from dive boat reporting 
having two divers aboard having made a rapid ascent from 
50m, one diver had had a leaking mask upon removing it to 
clear the water out at the MAX DEPTH! inhaled water, causing 
the diver to panic.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/455 
Falmouth Coastguard received a call from dive boat requesting 
assistance for a diver who had made a rapid ascent from 20m, 
a medi-link call was established and diver was recommended to 
return to shore, oxygen was to be given, the vessel returned to 
shore where it was met by Porthoustock Coastguard, no further 
medical assistance was given.  (Coastguard report). 
©BSAC -2005   35 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
September 2005 05/457 
Diver made a rapid ascent from 29.5m was recovered to the 
boat where he was administered oxygen, the dive boat 
contacted Solent Coastguard who organised a medi-link call to 
the vessel from QAH, the doctor recommended the casualty 
should be airlifted to recompression chamber for treatment, 
Coastguard rescue helicopter R-IJ recovered the patient and 
airlifted to QAH.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2005 05/465 
Diving vessel reported to Portland Coastguard having a diver 
aboard who had missed stops following a dive to 29m, the 
casualty was airlifted by Coastguard helicopter to 
recompression chamber where it was met at the HLS by Poole 
Coastguard and an ambulance.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2005 05/248 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 37m.  After 
32 min one of the pair indicated to his buddy that he wanted to 
ascend as he had 15 min to the surface indicated on his 
computer and 90 bar remaining.  They ascended to the top of 
the wreck at a depth of 32m during which time they became 
separated.  The diver who had signalled the ascent prepared to 
deploy his delayed SMB to make his ascent but the reel was 
jammed.  He spent some time trying to resolve this problem and 
then decided to use his spare reel.  By this time his time to the 
surface was 30 min and he was running low on breathing gas.  
He made a 1 min stop at 12m, a 8 min stop at 6m and a 6 min 
stop at 3m.  After this he ran out of gas and surfaced with his 
computer showing that he had missed 10 min of 
decompression.  He was using nitrox 27.  He was placed on 
oxygen for 20 min.   His buddy made a normal ascent.  No 
symptoms developed and no further action was taken.  The 
diver believes that he was affected by narcosis. 
September 2005 05/277 
A diver conducted a dive to 33m for 52 min with 13 min of 
decompression at 6m.  5 hours later he dived to 16m for 57 min 
with 3 min at 6m.  17 hours later he dived to 40m.  After 20 min 
he started his ascent up a shotline.  At 6m the line was dragged 
down by other divers on the line.  The diver and his buddy left 
the line and prepared to deploy a delayed SMB.  The reel 
jammed and the divers dumped it to prevent them being 
dragged upwards.  They prepared a second reel but this too 
jammed and was abandoned.  The divers had ascended 
normally to 6m, then one of them sank back to 23m, ascended 
to 18m and then sank back to 25m during this period.  With no 
SMB and in a current the diver decided to surface.  He 
ascended to the surface from 25m in about 90 seconds.  He 
was joined by his buddy at 13m on the final ascent.  Back on 
the boat he was placed on oxygen and given fluids.  The 
emergency services were alerted.  The diver was taken by 
ambulance to a recompression facility where he received 
precautionary recompression treatment.  He experienced no 
symptoms of DCI. 
September 2005 05/251 
Two divers conducted a dive to 20m.  During the ascent, one of 
the pair became confused and believes that she pressed the air 
fill rather than the dump valve of her BCD.  She made a rapid 
ascent to the surface.  Her buddy ascended normally.  The 
diver who had made the buoyant ascent was given water to 
drink and monitored for problems.  Medical advice was sought.  
No symptoms developed and no further action was required. 
September 2005 05/474 
Portland Coastguard received a call from dive vessel reporting 
having a diver aboard having missed 25 min of stops, rescue 
helicopter R-WB was tasked to airlift the casualty from the 
vessel, a medi-link call was established with the recompression 
chamber, the diver had been to 40m and was ascending when, 
at 12m, his weightbelt came off and he made a rapid ascent to 
the surface.  (Coastguard report). 
September 2005 05/280 
Two divers conducted a dive to 32m for 32 min with a 3 min 
stop at 6m.  1 hour 45 min later they dived to 30m.  After about 
20 min they started their ascent with their computers indicating 
6 min of decompression.  They deployed a delayed SMB.  Their 
ascent rate was slowed by a sticking SMB reel and the weight 
and drag of a bag full of scallops.  They conducted a 3 min stop 
at 6m and ascended to 3m where their computers now 
indicated that a 13 min stop was necessary.  After 3 min one of 
the pair was low on air and they planned to use the other diver's 
alternative air source.  However due to swell the diver who was 
low on air lost control of his depth and rose to the surface, his 
buddy followed him.  They had missed 11 min of 
decompression.   They were recovered into the boat, placed on 
oxygen and the Coastguard was alerted.  The divers were 
airlifted to a recompression facility where they were given 
precautionary treatment.  Neither diver experienced symptoms 
of DCI. 
 
 
 
36  ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
Technique 
 
 
October 2004 05/007 
An instructor and two trainees were engaged in an alternative air 
source training session at a depth of 8m.  With the two students 
sharing a regulator they ascended to the surface.  Their ascent 
was slow due to poor finning technique.  At the surface one of 
the students inflated his BCD; he was extremely out of breath.  
The second student had difficulty orally inflating her BCD and the 
instructor inflated it with the direct feed.  The first student was 
still out of breath and he removed his regulator and mask.  He 
then began to panic and swim for the shore.  During the short 
swim to the shore the second trainee stated that she was losing 
a fin.  The instructor took the fin.  The second trainee then 
became entangled in the SMB line and the instructor dropped 
the fin to resolve the tangle.  At the shore a fourth diver came to 
assist.  He offered his SMB as a buoyancy aid and gave the 
student one of his fins to allow her to swim to the exit point.  This 
student then began to feel dizzy and she vomited twice.  All 
divers were safely recovered from the water and no subsequent 
ill effects were experienced. 
November 2004 05/022 
Two trainees and an instructor conducted a dive to a maximum 
depth of 15m.  The two trainees' previous experience had been 
in warm water.  Towards the end of the dive they settled on a 
platform at a depth of 7m to conduct mask clearing drills as 
previously agreed.  The instructor demonstrated and one of the 
trainees completed the drill.  The second trainee then attempted 
this skill.  He kept his eyes closed as he wore contact lenses.  
When he removed his mask he was shocked by the cold water.  
He tried to refit the mask but did not feel that it was correctly 
fitted, so he removed it again.  He then inhaled some water and 
began to breathe heavily.  He signalled that he wished to ascend 
and the instructor brought him to the surface using a controlled 
buoyant lift.  At the surface he quickly recovered and no 
subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
 
January 2005 05/049 
Two divers completed a 34 min dive to a maximum depth of 20m 
with a 1 min stop at 6m.  1 hour 55 min later they dived again.  
One diver swam just behind the other and they regularly 
exchanged signals.  15 min into the dive, at a depth of 19m, the 
diver who was following removed her main regulator to reposition 
it.  During a subsequent breath her mouth became filled with 
water and she started to gag.  She tried to attract her buddy's 
attention by nudging his leg but he did not realise that this was a 
signal for help and swam on.  The troubled diver tried to use her 
octopus regulator but had no air in her lungs and was unable to 
purge it.  She did not think to use the purge button.  She made a 
rapid ascent to the surface and was assisted from the water by 
others.  Her buddy realised that she was missing and swam back 
looking for her and then made a normal ascent.  The troubled 
diver was placed on oxygen for 10 min.  The following day she 
experienced a tightness in her chest and sought medical 
attention.  Water inspiration was diagnosed and she was advised 
to see her doctor if an infection developed.  The diver had been 
using a regulator with a side mounted diaphragm and exhaust 
valve and it was thought that she had not moved her head to this 
side to enable the initial clearing of this regulator. 
February 2005 05/054 
Two divers descended a shotline.  During the descent they 
encountered a strong current, abandoned the shotline and 
descended in open water.  The current took them into deep 
water.  During the dive they were joined by a third diver who was 
using twin 12l cylinders.  When one of the original pair reached 
100 bar they prepared a delayed SMB to make their ascent.  The 
reel of this buoy jammed and was abandoned.  A second reel 
was prepared but the handle broke.  This second failure, 
combined with the current, led to a stressful ascent and by 15m 
the diver who had been down to 100 bar was running out of air.   
This diver used the alternative air source of the third diver.  They 
made a safe ascent to the surface incorporating a 3 min stop at 
6m.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
February 2005 05/060 
A trainee conducted a dive to a depth of 7m.  Towards the end of 
the dive he was low on air and surfaced with his buddy.  At the 
surface he had problems due to a lack of buoyancy, he 
swallowed some water and began to panic.  Once out of the 
water he was placed on oxygen and an ambulance was called.  
He was seen by a paramedic but no further action was taken.  
The diver's weightbelt weighed 19.4kg. 
April 2005 05/139 
A diver was sitting on a pontoon waiting to enter to the water to 
act as a casualty in a rescue management exercise.  He was 
wearing a twin set with which he was unfamiliar.  Without his 
mask, fins or his suit direct feed fitted he entered the water by 
falling forward.  The edge of the pontoon was thin and he 
became trapped, face down in the water with the pontoon 
wedged between his cylinders and his bottom.  Without his fins 
he was unable to kick free.  Another trainee quickly pushed him 
free.  Once free, he struggled to keep his face out of the water.  
An instructor went to his aid and he was helped from the water.  
No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
April 2005 05/226 
Two divers entered the water to make their first sea dive of the 
year.  Both were using equipment some of which was new to 
them.  One diver was insufficiently weighted and she pulled 
herself rapidly down the shotline.  The other diver attempted to 
keep up with her and became out of breath.  He found that he 
was over-weighted.  They dived down the side of a wreck to a 
depth of 23m.  When one of the divers reached 110 bar he 
signalled to his buddy and they ascended up the wreck.  They 
started to move back towards the shot.  But the current was 
stronger and the diver who had had 110 bar saw that his air was 
now down to 80 bar.  He signalled that they should ascend and 
he started to move up.  However his buddy did not follow and he 
completed his ascent alone.  He was recovered into the boat.  
His buddy continued to the shotline which she ascended, 
completing decompression stops on the way. 
April 2005 05/225 
Two divers entered the water to conduct a drift dive.  One of the 
pair was holding an SMB reel and the other was using a camera.  
Unknown to them, the diver with the reel started the dive with his 
pony regulator in his mouth instead of his main regulator.  Once 
underwater they started to swim through some deep gullies but 
had problems with the SMB line snagging on the rocks above 
them.  The diver carrying the reel had to stop and pull the line 
free.  As he did so he ran out of air.  He looked at his contents 
gauge which read 240 bar.  He then realise that he had the 
wrong regulator in his mouth but he was unable to find his main 
regulator or his octopus regulator.  He looked for his buddy but 
she was 5m away and busy with her camera.  The troubled diver 
had swallowed a lot of water and was beginning to panic.  He 
©BSAC -2005   37 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
had let go of the SMB reel and was sinking backwards when his 
regulator swung into view; he grabbed it and put it into his 
mouth.  He was sick and then recovered control.  His buddy 
recovered the SMB reel and handed it to him and they then 
completed the dive.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
May 2005 05/357 
Solent Coastguard received a call from dive support vessel 
reporting having a diver overdue by 15 min, the diver 
subsequently surfaced safe and well before the rescue helicopter 
and lifeboat arrived.  The diver had deployed his delayed SMB 
(alone) and the reel not being attached drifted off the diver, 
having over 20 min to go on ascent the diver drifted away from 
the support vessel.  (Coastguard report). 
May 2005 05/295 
Two divers dived to a depth of 20m.  Towards the end of the dive 
one of the pair was low on air.  She attempted to deploy a 
delayed SMB but failed to do so and lost a large amount of air 
from her octopus regulator.  Her buddy filled the SMB and began 
the ascent.  The diver who was low on air struggled to leave the 
bottom and had to fin very hard.  She added some air to her 
BCD but had very little air left.  At 10m she grabbed her buddy's 
regulator and began to panic.  The buddy switched to his back 
up regulator and managed to regain control.  They made a 
normal ascent with stops at 6 and 3m.  No subsequent ill effects 
were experienced. 
May 2005 05/148 
Two pairs of rebreather divers entered the water to descend a 
shotline to a wreck.  The site was very busy, underwater visibility 
was low, and there were many divers using the same shotline.  
One of the divers signalled to his buddy and dived. He swam to 
the shot and started to descend.  His signal had not been seen 
by his buddy and the other divers were unaware of his actions.  
The lone diver saw other divers on the shot above him and 
assumed that they were his buddies.  He continued down to the 
wreck at a depth of 36m.  At the bottom he waited for the other 
divers.  The others realised that the fourth diver was missing and 
descended the shotline to find him.  At 20m there was no sign of 
him and they decided to abort the dive.  They surfaced and left 
the water.  The lone diver discovered that those following were 
not his buddies.  He then saw others descending and waited for 
them, only to find that they too were not his buddies.  He then 
discovered that his dive computer was showing a low battery 
warning.  The computer then went blank.  He checked his 
backup computer and this too had failed.  With no time or depth 
information he made a very slow ascent up the shotline.  Nearing 
the surface he spotted a decompression trapeze and moved on 
to it.  He then deployed a delayed SMB.  A diver from another 
group descended to confirm that it was the missing diver and 
that he was not in trouble.  After he had been missing for 20 min 
the Coastguard was alerted and a lifeboat and a helicopter were 
tasked to search.  The diver eventually surfaced after a dive time 
of 40 min.  He suffered no ill effects.  Both computers had 
suffered battery failure.  One had had new batteries that month 
and the other within 6 months. 
June 2005 05/163 
Two divers entered the water to descend a shotline.  They had 
readied themselves in a hurry because of a short slack water 
period.  One of the divers had turned her air on but, in the haste 
to prepare, someone else had turned it off again.  At about 10m 
this diver was unable to get further air.  Her buddy was using a 
recently reconfigured diving set and had not yet fitted an 
alternative air source.  They attempted to share the buddy's main 
regulator.  The diver who had her air turned off was negatively 
buoyant and they sank down the shotline.  The air donor had a 
hammer clipped to him with a karabiner and this became 
entangled in the shotline and stopped his descent.  The diver 
without air continued to sink to the seabed at 27m.  Her buddy 
had managed to turn her air cylinder on slightly and she was 
able to inflate her drysuit. She made a rapid, buoyant ascent to 
the surface.  The buddy was still tangled in the shotline and 
unable to get to his regulator.  Another pair of divers from the 
same party descended the shotline and found the tangled diver.  
They gave him an alternative air source, untangled him and all 
three made a controlled ascent to the surface.  The diver who 
made the rapid ascent arrived at the surface dazed and 
coughing up blood, she was recovered into the boat and placed 
on oxygen.  The boat returned to the shore and both divers were 
taken to hospital for checks.  No subsequent ill effects were 
experienced. 
June 2005 05/174 
Two divers descended a buoyed chain to a wreck.  There was a 
strong current.  They exchanged OK signals during the descent.   
In low visibility they became separated.  One of the pair was too 
buoyant and ascended quickly to the surface.  The other diver 
reached the wreck and realised that his buddy was missing.  He 
looked around and then made his way back to the chain to make 
his ascent.  Both were safely recovered into the boat.  No 
subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
July 2005 05/170 
Two divers dived to a depth of 22m in a quarry.  During their 
ascent one of the pair ran out of air at about 11m.  He switched 
to  his pony regulator and continued his ascent.  At the surface 
he took the regulator from his mouth but was unable to inflate his 
BCD because his main cylinder was empty.  He failed to retrieve 
his regulator and began to sink.  At 5m he dropped his weightbelt 
and returned to the surface.  He shouted for help and another 
diver entered the water and assisted him back to the shore.  He 
was placed on oxygen and airlifted to a hospital for checks. 
August 2005 05/430 
Swansea Coastguard received a 999 call from dive boat 
reporting a missing diver, Swansea Coastguard tasked Horton & 
Port Eynon lifeboats, RAF rescue helicopter R-169 and Oxwich 
Coastguard.  The units commenced searching when the diver 
was recovered by lifeboat, the diver had dived from a friend's 
RHIB with no marker float and no buddy and 5min into the dive 
his computer failed, continuing with the dive, he lost contact with 
the boat, when ashore was uncooperative not giving his name or 
details of club.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/211 
A pair of divers entered the water and swam to a shotline.  They 
started their descent and, at 4m, one of the divers' regulators 
stopped feeding him air.  His buddy was slightly below him and 
he headed back to the surface.  At the surface he was unable to 
inflate his BCD and he struggled to stay at the surface.  His 
buddy surfaced and gave him her primary regulator and switched 
to her own alternative air source.  Two other divers from this 
party had just started their descent, they saw that there was a 
problem and returned to help.  The troubled diver managed to 
shout that he had no air and one of the others checked his pillar 
valves.  The diver was wearing a twin-set and the valve to his 
reserve regulator was turned on but the valve to his main 
regulator was turned off.  The other diver turned this valve on 
and the diver was able to inflate his BCD.  The diver was 
recovered into the boat and the Coastguard was alerted.  The 
diver was airlifted to a hospital for a check up and released later 
that day 
 
 
38  ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
August 2005 05/445 rescue helicopter R-WB airlifted the divers to Poole HLS where they were met by an ambulance and Poole Coastguard and 
transported to Poole chamber.  (Coastguard report). Two divers ran out of air whilst on a 27m dive, the dive boat had 
no means of communication so the distress situation was 
relayed to  Portland Coastguard  by another vessel,  Coastguard  
 
 
©BSAC -2005   39 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
Equipment 
 
 
January 2005 05/047 
Two divers conducted a dive to 33m using rebreathers.  At 33m 
one of the pair noticed a bad taste build up and changed to his 
open circuit bail out system.  They aborted the dive and started 
their ascent.  He checked again at 17m but the bad taste 
remained.  The dive was terminated with a duration of 26 min.  
The diver was placed on oxygen once out of the water.  No 
subsequent ill effects were experienced.  It is thought that the 
cause was cleaning fluid in the gas loop. 
January 2005 05/050 
A diver was preparing to conduct a dive to 9m using a 
rebreather.  He had conducted pre-checks the previous night 
and he re-checked the unit prior to use.  He put the unit on and 
walked to the water's edge where he conducted pre-dive buddy 
checks.  During these checks the rebreather exploded and 
caught fire.  The oxygen valve could not be shut and smoke 
billowed from the unit.  Others helped him to remove the 
rebreather which was then dropped into the water.  It was then 
recovered from the water and oxygen continued to leak from it 
until the cylinder was depleted.  Damage was found to the 
cylinder valve first stage, the high pressure hose and gauge 
and the low pressure hose to the manifold.  The carbon dioxide 
scrubber container was burned, the cover catches were blown 
off and the whole system was covered by a greasy carbon 
deposit.  No injuries were sustained. 
February 2005 05/052 
A group of divers were engaged in a nitrox training course.  A 
number of the trainees reported that their breathing gas did not 
taste right.  When checked, the gas in these cylinders appeared 
to contain the odour of some solvent.  Four cylinders were 
affected.  The pillar valve was removed from one of these 
cylinders and it was found that the neck of the cylinder had 
been painted internally.  This cylinder was also found to contain 
rust.  Nitrox 32 had been ordered but cylinders contained a 
range from nitrox 21 to nitrox 34.  No ill effects resulted from 
these issues. 
 
February 2005 05/101 
Two divers were 4 min into a dive at a depth of 18m when the 
regulator of one of the pair started to free flow.  This diver made 
a rapid ascent to the surface.  At the surface she removed her 
BCD and cylinder and dumped them.  She also removed her 
dry gloves.  The gloves were sealed to her drysuit and this 
opened her drysuit to flooding.  She was quickly recovered into 
a boat and placed on oxygen.  Her buddy surfaced 8 min after 
her.  Her diving equipment was later recovered from underwater 
and it was found difficult to release the weights from the pocket 
system of the BCD.  No subsequent ill effects were reported.  
This diver had a membrane drysuit and without her BCD and 
with her suit unsealed by the removal of her gloves she would 
have been in significant difficulties if the boat had not arrived as 
quickly as it did. 
March 2005 05/064 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 35m.  9 
min into the dive one of the pair experienced a mild free flow of 
his regulator.  He switched to his octopus regulator which also 
began to free flow.  He took his buddy's octopus regulator but, 
in doing so, he dislodged his buddy's face mask causing it to 
flood.  The buddy's octopus regulator gave him a mouthful of 
water so he switched back to his own, free flowing regulator.  
During this time they had stirred up silt and they lost sight of 
each other.  Both made an ascent to the surface during which 
the buddy's regulator also started to free flow.  Their ascents 
were faster than normal.  Once out of the water both were 
placed on oxygen.  No ill effects were experienced.  
Subsequent examination showed that one of the regulators had 
suffered a build up of salt crystals. 
March 2005 05/099 
A diver was at his maximum depth of 20m when his regulator 
began to free flow.  He made a rapid ascent to the surface.  His 
dive duration was 3 min.  He was placed on oxygen.  No 
subsequent ill effects were experienced.  The water 
temperature was 5 deg C. 
March 2005 05/286 
Two groups of divers entered the water together for a dive.  
One pair and one group of three.  They descended a shotline to 
a depth of 29m.  One of the group was near the bottom when 
his main regulator began to free flow.  The divers ascended 
together with the diver with the free flow still breathing from this 
regulator.  At 20m his contents gauge was reading 50 bar so he 
switched to the octopus regulator of one of the other divers.  
They completed a 1 min safety stop at 3m and then surfaced.  
No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
March 2005 05/083 
An instructor and two trainees conducted a dive to a maximum 
depth of 18m.  They were practicing the deployment of a 
delayed SMB mid-water.  One of the trainees was filling the 
buoy with his alternative regulator when it began to free flow.  
The free flow could not be stopped.  At this point the trainee 
had 100 bar in his cylinder.  The instructor signalled the ascent.  
The diver with the free flow and the instructor ascended 
together and the other trainee ascended a little below them, 
winding in the SMB line.  At 3m the free flow stopped and the 
trainee gave the 'out of air' signal and started to sink.  The 
instructor gave his alternative air source to the trainee and took 
hold of him.  They sank back down to 13m at which point the 
instructor used his drysuit buoyancy to bring them to the 
surface.  At the surface the instructor held on to the trainee 
whilst he orally inflated his BCD.  All were safely recovered from 
the water and no subsequent ill effects were experienced.  Their 
total dive time was 15 min.  The water temperature was 5 deg 
C. 
April 2005 05/085 
A diver was conducting a demonstration lesson on an instructor 
training course.  He was at a depth of 12m and he used his 
alternative air source to inflate a delayed SMB.  The regulator 
began to free flow.  He ascended with his students and inflated 
his BCD at the surface.  The instructor trainer then turned off 
the air supply to the regulator.  All were safely recovered from 
the water and no subsequent ill effects were experienced.  Their 
total dive duration was 16 min and the water temperature was 7 
deg C. 
April 2005 05/116 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 22m.  At 
this depth the weightbelt of one of the divers came loose.  He 
struggled to solve the problem and two other divers helped.  
They made their ascent by following a sloping contour towards 
40  ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
the surface.  They made a 2 min stop at 7m before surfacing.  
Their dive duration was 17 min.  The diver who had had 
problems with his weightbelt was quite shaken by the 
experience.  He was placed on oxygen.  No subsequent ill 
effects were experienced. 
May 2005 05/140 
Three divers entered the water to conduct compass training.  
One of the three was using a new regulator that had only been 
used on one other open water dive.  When they entered the 
water this regulator free flowed.  The diver stopped the free flow 
by turning it down into the water.  At 15m he noticed that his 
octopus regulator was free flowing.  One of his buddies offered 
his alternative air source and the diver took it.  Bubbles from the 
regulator obscured visibility and the other buddy took the free 
flowing regulator and held it out of the way.  The free flow had 
reduced the diver's air to close to zero.  They settled onto the 
bottom at 20m.  The buddy who had provided the alternative air 
source then commenced a controlled buoyant lift.  All three 
made a controlled ascent to the surface.  The diver who was out 
of air used his BCD emergency cylinder to gain surface 
buoyancy.  All three left the water safely. 
May 2005 05/128 
An instructor was engaged in a 'Try dive' session in a swimming 
pool.  He was at a depth of 3m with a trainee.  The instructor 
was kneeling on the bottom of the pool when the mouthpiece 
became detached from his regulator.  He reached for his 
octopus regulator and put this in his mouth.  However the 
mouthpiece became detached from this regulator too.  He 
indicated to the trainee to ascend and the instructor made a 
free ascent to the surface, breathing out as he did so.  Both left 
the pool safely.  The regulator had been recently serviced.  No 
sign of any mouthpiece fastening band was found during a 
search of the pool bottom.  The case was referred to the service 
agent. 
May 2005 05/134 
Two divers descended to a depth of 20m in a quarry and started 
to swim on a compass bearing.  One of the pair felt that his 
regulator was not providing air normally and he checked the 
manual settings on the second stage.  He decided to continue 
but then, 1 min later, he could hear bubbles and he stopped his 
buddy.  The regulator then began to free flow gently.  He 
checked his contents gauge and found that the pressure had 
dropped 90 bar in 8 min.  The divers started their ascent and as 
they rose the free flow became violent, filling the water with 
bubbles and obscuring the divers' vision.  They made a slightly 
faster than normal ascent to the surface.  At the surface they 
were recovered into a boat and brought to the shore.  They 
were placed on oxygen for 2 hours and medical advice sought.  
No symptoms were experienced by either diver and no further 
action was taken. 
June 2005 05/150 
A trainee instructor was engaged in an instructor training 
course.  With his instructor he dived to a maximum depth of 
12m.  At a depth of 8m he was demonstrating regulator clearing 
when his regulator began to free flow.  The escaping gas made 
the regulator rise up above the trainee and he had difficulty 
locating it.  The instructor gave the valve back to the trainee 
who tried to breathe from it.  Meanwhile the instructor made 
ready his pony regulator.  The free flow continued and the 
student struggled to breathe from the regulator.  The instructor 
gave the student his pony regulator and they made a slightly 
faster than normal ascent to the surface.  Their dive duration 
was 8 min.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
June 2005 05/154 
A pair of divers conducted a wreck dive to a maximum depth of 
24m.  At the end of the dive one of the divers gripped the wreck 
with his legs and deployed a delayed SMB.  As the buoy rose 
he tried to use the reel ratchet to control its ascent rate.  The 
ratchet did not work and the buoy accelerated.  The line then 
became jammed on the reel.  He then attached his buddy's reel 
to his jammed reel and used this to complete the SMB 
deployment.  They made a safe ascent to the surface.  
Subsequent examination of the reel indicated a fault with the 
ratchet lever spring. 
June 2005 05/205 
Two divers conducted a wreck dive to a maximum depth of 
26m.  At the end of the dive, with a 50 bar reserve, they 
prepared to deploy a delayed SMB.  They had to move to 
another location because of crowding by other divers.  During 
the move, one of the divers' weightbelts became detached and 
she had to fin back down to the wreck where she held on with 
her legs.  The buddy passed stones to her which she put in her 
BCD pockets.  They deployed the SMB but the reel jammed 
and it was released.  The buoyant diver then ran out of air and 
switched to her pony cylinder.  The buddy gave the diver more 
weight to carry and they started their ascent.  At 13m the diver's 
pony cylinder ran out and she signalled 'out of air' to her buddy.  
The buddy gave her his octopus regulator and they completed 
their ascent to the surface.  They called for assistance and were 
recovered into their boat.  The computers did not indicate any 
missed stops but one showed a fast ascent and was in 
emergency mode.  The divers were monitored but no symptoms 
of DCI developed. 
June 2005 05/165 
Two divers entered the water and commenced their descent 
down a shotline.  There was a strong current and they had to 
pull themselves down the line.  They exchanged OK signals as 
they descended.  At the bottom one of the divers discovered 
that she was out of air and signalled to her buddy.  He gave her 
his octopus regulator and they made a safe ascent up the 
shotline.  It was later determined that the octopus regulator of 
the diver who was out of air had been free flowing in the current 
during the descent.  The current had carried the bubbles away 
and neither diver was aware of the problem. 
June 2005 05/178 
Two divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 13m.  
During this dive one of the pair felt a 'bit odd'.  The following day 
they dived to a maximum depth of 24m.  The same diver 
developed a headache which progressively worsened.  He felt 
that he might pass out and moved to a shallower depth.  He 
indicated to his buddy that he had a serious headache and the 
buddy indicated that he had the same.  On surfacing they 
discovered that they had the same symptoms; headache, 
nausea, excessive burping and general weakness.  They 
concluded that their air had been contaminated and they sought 
medical advice.  A visit to the compressor revealed that it was 
situated in an area close to open tins of hypochlorite acid and 
other agricultural chemicals.  Exposed to these conditions the 
divers again felt ill.  They report subsequent chest and throat 
problems.  The cylinders had been filled on a day when the air 
temperature was high. 
July 2005 05/265 
An examiner was diving with an exam candidate to a depth of 
22m.  The examiner was using a rebreather.  About 15 min into 
the dive he inverted to get a close look at something.  When he 
inhaled he got a mouthful of water.  It tasted as if it had come in 
contact with the carbon dioxide scrubber.  When the water hit 
the back of his throat it caused him to gag.  He bailed out onto 
©BSAC -2005   41 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
an open circuit system containing nitrox 40.  He had to force 
himself to breathe steadily and it took him some time to regain 
control of his breathing.  He coughed sporadically for a few 
minutes.  Once he had settled they continued the dive.  Their 
dive duration was 36 min.  Once back on the boat he gargled 
with fresh water.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced. 
September 2005 05/254 
Three divers were conducting a drift dive at a maximum depth 
of 18m.  26 min into the dive the low pressure hose of one of 
the divers' regulators ruptured at the connection point to the 
second stage regulator.  The diver swam to one of his buddies 
who gave him his main regulator and switched onto his pony 
regulator.  Visibility was reduced around the divers by the 
bubble cloud and the hose thrashed around in the water hitting 
one of the divers.  The buddy then managed to turn the cylinder 
off.  The two divers made an uncontrolled fast ascent from 15 to 
7m.  At 7m they managed to reduce their rate of ascent and 
rose to the surface slightly faster than normal.  The third diver 
went with them.  No subsequent ill effects were experienced by 
any of the divers. 
 
42  ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
Miscellaneous 
 
 
October 2004 05/313 
Solent Coastguard tasked Littlehampton Coastguard to 
investigate a report of a person in the water skin diving believed 
in difficulty.  On investigation the skin diver was safe.  False 
alarm with good intent.  (Coastguard report). 
October 2004 05/318 
Dive support vessel contacted Portland Coastguard expressing 
concern for two divers whose surface marker buoy had 
disappeared.  Divers subsequently surfaced safe and well.  
(Coastguard report). 
November 2004 05/322 
Dive support vessel contacted Milford Haven Coastguard 
reporting an overdue diver, the diver surfaced safe and well, 
before search and rescue resources were mobilised.  False 
alarm with good intent.  (Coastguard report). 
December 2004 05/224 
A trainee diver did a stride entry into a swimming pool.  As soon 
as he was in the water there was a loud noise and air rushed 
from the area of his regulator first stage.  He was helped from 
the pool and the equipment was examined.  It was found that the 
part of the valve was loose, causing a sealing ring to blow out 
and thus allowing the air to escape.  This valve and three other 
similar valves had recently been serviced.  The same fault was 
found on them all.  The specification for the torque on this part 
was 30Nm and all were found to be finger tight. 
January 2005 05/329 
Brixham Coastguard tasked Torbay Coastguard team to 
investigate reports of two divers in difficulties.  Teignmouth 
inshore lifeboat proceeded with Coastguard helicopter also 
tasked, the divers were reported safely ashore.  All units stood 
down.  False alarm with good intent.  (Coastguard report). 
February 2005 05/333 
Brixham Coastguard tasked Berry Head Coastguard team to 
investigate the report of a diver in possible difficulties, the diver 
made his own way ashore.  Confirmed safe and well.  
(Coastguard report). 
February 2005 05/332 
Concern was raised for the safety of a RHIB with eight POB, 
safety investigations were commenced by Holyhead Coastguard 
tasking Penmon and Cemaes Coastguard teams to investigate.  
The vessel safely returned to harbour, SAR operations 
terminated.  (Coastguard report). 
March 2005 05/340 
Aberdeen Coastguard received a call from a member of the 
public reporting two divers missing in poor visibility.  Peterhead 
Coastguard were tasked to attend, reporting both divers were 
ashore safe and well.  (Coastguard report). 
April 2005 05/343 
Portland Coastguard was alerted by the shore contact of three 
divers drift diving, the divers were located safe and well still 
diving.  (Coastguard report). 
 
April 2005 05/292 
Two divers descended a shotline.  At 36m they left the line and 
dropped to the seabed at a depth of 42m.  One of the divers 
became breathless and signalled to his buddy that he wanted to 
ascend.  The diver was hyperventilating and starting to panic.  
The buddy led him back to the shotline and controlled their 
ascent at a safe rate.  At 15m the panicked diver had regained 
control and they made a safe ascent to the surface including a 5 
min safety stop at 5m.  It is thought that the distressed diver had 
suffered from nitrogen narcosis.  No subsequent ill effects were 
experienced. 
April 2005 05/293 
Two divers descended a shotline to a depth of 39m.  One of the 
pair began to feel breathless and indicated the problem to his 
buddy.  The buddy helped him back to the shotline and they 
made a safe ascent to the surface.  The diver thought that he 
had been affected by nitrogen narcosis. 
April 2005 05/490 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  False alarm.  
(RNLI report). 
April 2005 05/492 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  False alarm.  
(RNLI report). 
April 2005 05/350 
Stornoway Coastguard received a call from ambulance control 
reporting a dive vessel on fire, ambulance, police and fire service 
on scene.  One person trapped in cabin rescued.  (Coastguard & 
RNLI reports). 
May 2005 05/130 
A pair of divers entered the water from the shore to conduct a 
navigation exercise.  They dived to a maximum depth of 8m.  
After about 4 min their SMB moved out of the designated area 
and the dive marshal was about to send another diver in to pull 
on the SMB line when one of the pair surfaced.  He reported that 
he had become separated from his buddy.  The Coastguard was 
informed and a boat was used to search for the missing diver.  
The second diver was found, at the surface, 35 min after he was 
reported missing.  He was safely recovered.  He reported that he 
had found himself alone at 8m and then surfaced.  A lifeboat and 
a helicopter were also tasked to assist. 
May 2005 05/495 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat.  False alarm.  (RNLI 
report). 
May 2005 05/366 
Stornoway Coastguard received a call from a M/V reporting a 
diving RHIB aground, the Lochinver lifeboat was tasked assist, 
on arrival the vessel was moored and three divers had left the 
boat to go diving.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
May 2005 05/496 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  False alarm.  
(RNLI report). 
©BSAC - 2005   43 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
May 2005 05/498 June 2005 05/399 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  False alarm.  
(RNLI report). 
Two divers left the dive boat unattended whilst diving, on return 
to the vessel one was unable to get back aboard, the other got 
aboard but could not recover the anchor, the other diver drifted 
away in the tide!  Wait there is more!  Solent Coastguard were 
alerted, tasking Coastguard rescue helicopter R-I, Brighton 
beach patrol and Brighton lifeboat, the divers were recovered to 
their own vessel.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
June 2005 05/499 
Two lifeboats assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  False 
alarm.  (RNLI report). 
June 2005 05/501 June 2005 05/506 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  False alarm.  
(RNLI report). 
Lifeboat assisted in the search for missing diver(s).  False alarm.  
(RNLI report). 
June 2005 05/503 August 2005 05/433 
Lifeboat launched to assist dive boat.  False alarm.  (RNLI 
report). 
Brixham Coastguard received a call from a fishing vessel 
following a near miss with shore divers near Slapton Sands, the 
skipper reported the divers had no surface craft and were not 
displaying a diving flag although they were using a SMB, the F/V 
moved further out to sea and further dangers were avoided.  
Safety advice given.  (Coastguard report). 
June 2005 05/384 
Portland Coastguard received a 999 call from a diving vessel on 
a mobile telephone, the report came from the boat skipper 
reporting a missing diver, the diver had gone on a solo dive for 
scallops, the boat skipper was very inexperienced.  Portland 
tasked MCA boat Osprey to attend, the MCA boat found the 
casualty vessel and then the diver.  The vessel was towed to 
shore where they were met by Wyke Coastguard, safety advice 
was given.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/441 
Two divers were shore diving when they were caught in the line 
of a fisherman, the diver freed himself with the help of the buddy 
diver, Sunderland lifeboat and Sunderland VLB also attended, 
the divers were unharmed and continued their dive.  (Coastguard 
report). 
June 2005 05/389 
August 2005 05/446 Portland Coastguard received many 999 calls reporting a diver 
off Portland Bill shouting for assistance, Portland Coastguard 
tasked R-WB to attend the diver.  When on scene the diver 
refused to be recovered, he eventually was picked up by another 
vessel and returned to Portland, no medical assistance was 
required.  (Coastguard report). 
Stornoway Coastguard received a call from a fishing vessel 
reporting an unattended dive RHIB, shortly afterwards the two 
occupants surfaced unaware of the concern they had caused.  
False alarm with good intent.  (Coastguard report). 
August 2005 05/456 
June 2005 05/396 Portland Coastguard were alerted by a diving vessel of two 
divers overdue following a dive to 20m, Swanage lifeboat and 
inshore lifeboat were tasked together with Swanage Coastguard, 
before the resources arrived on scene the divers surfaced safe 
and well.  (Coastguard report). 
Two divers became exhausted following a shore dive, the divers 
waved for assistance, Newhaven lifeboat recovered the divers to 
shore assisted and conned to the divers by the NCI National 
Coastwatch.  (Coastguard & RNLI reports). 
 
 
 
44  ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
Overseas Incidents 
 
 
Fatalities 
March 2005 05/040 
A diver experienced difficulties whilst exploring a wreck.  He 
signalled that he had a problem and his buddy assisted him to 
the surface.  Resuscitation techniques were applied but he 
failed to recover.  It is thought that a heart attack may have 
been the cause.  (Media report). 
March 2005 05/094 
A potential new trainee participated in a pool training session.  
This diver had some diving experience over two years earlier 
and wanted to be re-familiarised with diving skills.  He 
snorkelled a length of the pool and then was seen to be in 
difficulties at the surface.  He was quickly recovered from the 
pool.  He lost consciousness and had no pulse.  Resuscitation 
attempts were started and the emergency services were called.  
The casualty was taken to hospital but declared dead on arrival.  
It was later reported that he had suffered a heart attack 
apparently as a result of a deep vein thrombosis. 
April 2005 05/087 
A diver failed to surface after a dive to 3m.  His body was 
recovered from the water but resuscitation attempts failed.  
(Media report). 
 
 
 
Decompression Illness 
January 2005 05/055 
A diver completed a 26 min dive to 30m with a 3 min safety stop 
at 6m.  27 hours later he dived to 9 m for 40 min with a 3 min 
safety stop at 6m.  3 hours later he complained of a mild tingling 
in two fingers of his left hand and a soreness in his upper and 
lower forearm.  This diver had an infected insect bite and this 
was thought to be the cause.  Later that day he was examined 
by a doctor at a hyperbaric facility and a DCI was diagnosed.  
He received four sessions of recompression treatment before 
flying home. 
June 2005 05/151 
Two divers completed a 48 min dive to a maximum depth of 
25m including a 3 min stop at 5m.  1 hour 30 min after the dive, 
whilst driving home, one of the pair experienced sudden vertigo.  
He stopped his car.  He then developed a tingling in both arms.  
He contacted the emergency services and was taken by 
ambulance to hospital.  From hospital he was taken to a 
recompression facility where he received a course of four 
recompression treatments over the following days.  He made an 
almost full recovery although he had residual occasional 
dizziness and headaches.  He was diagnosed with DCI and a 
subsequent test revealed a sizeable PFO.  The PFO was 
closed and the diver was able to return to diving. 
June 2005 05/161 
A dive instructor supervised four controlled buoyant lifts from 
12m as part of a training programme followed by a 20 min dive 
to 12m.  The following day he dived to a maximum depth of 
24m.  After 20 min a delayed SMB was deployed and the divers 
ascended.  At 20m the diver noted a pain in his wrist which 
increased as he ascended.  He conducted a 3 min safety stop 
at 6m and a further 3 min at 3m.  Once out of the water he was 
placed on oxygen and this eased the pain.  Medical advice was 
sought and he received recompression treatment. 
July 2005 05/262 
A diver conducted a 46 min dive to 41m with about 15 min 
spent at less than 8m at the end of the dive.  1 hour 15 min later 
he dived to 6 m for 7 min.  38 min later he dived to 44m for 43 
min with the last 15 min spent slowly surfacing from 8m.  About 
30 min later he noticed an ache in his upper arms and then in 
his shoulders and elbows.  2 hours later the condition was 
unchanged.  He breathed oxygen for an hour, which had no 
effect on the symptoms.  He was admitted into hospital and kept 
on oxygen.  The following day the pain had lessened and he 
was discharged from hospital.  The next day he was examined 
at a recompression facility and treatment was not deemed 
necessary.  The evening of the following day he had a tingling 
in his right arm and leg, a very slight disturbance in his right 
eye, and a very slight speech disturbance.  He sought further 
medical advice.  He was given precautionary recompression 
treatment that did not affect his symptoms.  It was finally 
concluded that his second phase of symptoms were unlikely to 
have been diving related. 
August 2005 05/208 
A diver completed a 21 min dive to a depth of 20m with a 1 min 
stop at 6m.  3 hours 39 min later he dived to 17m for 23 min 
with a 1 min stop at 6m.  After this dive he noted a rash on his 
left thigh and joint pain and stiffness in one of the fingers of his 
left hand.  The diver received recompression treatment which 
resolved his symptoms. 
August 2005 05/233 
A diver conducted a 41 min dive to a depth of 40m using air as 
his main gas and nitrox 66 to decompress.  He used a dive 
computer set for air.  4 hours 33 min later he dived to 37m 
again using air.  After 40 min his buddy surfaced and he 
continued the dive alone.  He surfaced after 77 min having 
conducted 20 min of decompression stops using nitrox 50.  An 
hour after his last dive he felt a pain in his shoulder but he did 
not tell anyone.  The following morning he had a severe 
shoulder pain.  He was placed on oxygen and medical advice 
was sought.  He was airlifted to a recompression facility where 
he was treated for DCI.  This treatment had little effect on his 
symptoms. 
September 2005 05/223 
A diver inhaled water from an apparently defective regulator 
and made a rapid ascent from 10m.  She was placed on oxygen 
and taken to a recompression facility and treated for DCI.  After 
treatment she still experienced 'pins and needles' on the right 
hand side of her body. 
 
 
Illness / Injury 
October 2004 05/311 
A fully kitted diver tripped over a bollard at the back of a dive 
boat whilst moving to enter the water.  She fell spraining her 
ankle.  She sought medical advice once ashore.  She did not 
take part in any further diving. 
©BSAC - 2005   45 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
October 2004 05/011 
A diver conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 30m.  At 20m 
he developed a headache and had a bad taste in his mouth.  
He took his buddy's alternative air source and they ascended to 
the surface, completing a 3 min stop at 6m on the way.  Their 
dive duration was 10 min.  The diver was placed on oxygen and 
the party returned to the shore.  The diver and his buddy were 
taken to hospital where they were found to be fit.  The air was 
tested and found to contain oil from the compressor.  The 
compressor 'oil blow off' was found to be faulty.  Steps were 
taken to ensure that no further contaminated air was used. 
November 2004 05/018 
A pair of divers were diving with others to a depth of 25m along 
the side of an underwater cliff face.  At 18m one of the pair 
noticed that his buddy appeared to be in difficulties; he was 
'wide-eyed' and seemed to be lapsing into unconsciousness.  
The buddy gave the 'ascend' signal and got a weak 'OK' signal 
in response.  The buddy took hold of the troubled diver and 
brought him to the surface.  At the surface the diver was unable 
to climb the ladder into the boat and needed assistance.  Once 
in the boat his equipment was removed.  He was shaking badly 
and complained of dizziness and confusion.  Other divers from 
the group returned to the boat and one of these prepared 
oxygen for the casualty.  The diver lost feeling in his right arm 
and had a numbness in his right leg.  The diver was taken 
ashore in a rescue boat and from there to a recompression 
facility.  No DCI was found and the casualty was discharged.  
He was advised to re-hydrate and to return to the facility the 
following day if symptoms persisted.  The casualty had a 
predisposition to vertigo and later explained that the experience 
of a wall dive and of the open sea around and below him 
caused him to feel dizzy and apprehensive.  The condition 
worsened and he began to panic. 
February 2005 05/057 
A diver conducted a 40 min dive to 37m with a 3 min safety stop 
at 6m.  30 min after the dive, back in the boat, he used a pair of 
binoculars and immediately became very seasick.  He lay down 
but the symptoms remained for 6 hours.  He was then placed 
on oxygen and medical advice was sought.  This diver had 
suffered seasickness the previous day.  It was thought unlikely 
that the cause was DCI but, due to the remote area in which the 
divers were operating, it was decided to evacuate him to a 
recompression facility.  The diver was examined by an ears, 
nose and throat specialist.  His condition was not considered to 
be diving related but he was given a precautionary 
recompression treatment.  The final diagnosis was severe 
seasickness and vertigo caused by using binoculars on a 
moving boat following a previous bout of seasickness.  Further 
oxygen therapy was given. 
February 2005 05/058 
A diver undertook his first open water dive.  He had problems 
with his buoyancy control and continually rose and sank 
between 5 and 10m.  His maximum depth was 13m.  During this 
dive he suffered a ruptured eardrum.  The diver was wearing a 
hood for the first time.  The dive was aborted and he was taken 
to hospital. 
 
March 2005 05/066 
Three divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 33m, and 
planned to limit their total dive time to 50 min.  At the end of 
their dive they ascended a shotline and conducted 
decompression stops at 6m.  After 64 min they surfaced and 
once at the side of the boat it became apparent that one of the 
three was unwell; he was cold and unresponsive.  He was 
recovered into the boat and placed on oxygen.  The party 
returned to the shore and the diver was taken by ambulance to 
hospital.  He was diagnosed as being hypothermic and slightly 
dehydrated.  He was given a precautionary recompression 
treatment.  He made a full recovery. 
March 2005 05/103 
After a dive, a diver was transferring his equipment from an 
RHIB to another, larger, boat in rough conditions.  Whilst doing 
so he slipped and twisted his ankle.  The ankle became 
swollen.  He went to hospital where it was determined that the 
ankle was not broken. 
April 2005 05/119 
An instructor and a trainee descended a shotline to a depth of 
6m to conduct mask clearing and ascent using an alternative air 
source.  The trainee was unable to confidently clear his mask 
and was slow to respond to signals.  The instructor brought the 
trainee to the surface and the trainee left the water.  The trainee 
later complained of a mild pain in his ear and slight deafness.   
Subsequent medical examination revealed that he had suffered 
a rupture to his left eardrum.  This eardrum had been previously 
ruptured in his childhood. 
May 2005 05/145 
A trainee was in the shallow end of a swimming pool practicing 
mask clearing drills with an instructor.  She had difficulties 
clearing a fully flooded mask and her instructor helped her to 
stand up.  She removed her mask and mouthpiece and then 
complained of an intense headache.  She was helped from the 
water and medical advice was sought.  She was taken to 
hospital where she was given pain killing drugs.  She was 
released later the same day. 
June 2005 05/152 
An instructor and two trainees conducted a 30 min dive to a 
maximum depth of 15m.  5 hours 30 min later they dived to 13m 
for 28 min.  After this dive one of the trainees noticed a slight 
discharge from and blood in his left ear.  Medical advice was 
sought the following day and the diver was placed on antibiotics 
for a severe ear infection. 
July 2005 05/179 
A diver completed a 45 min dive to a depth of 27m and 
surfaced normally.  At the surface he was unable to fill his BCD 
since the upper dump valve of the BCD had become detached 
from the bag.  The bag filled with water.  He had a 75m surface 
swim and he struggled to keep afloat.  He started to cough and 
swallowed some seawater.  As he approached the boat some 
blood was seen to come from his mouth.  The diver attended 
hospital for checks and stayed in over-night for observation. 
August 2005 05/209 
A diver completed a 22 min dive to a depth of 20m.  After the 
dive he sought medical advice since he had pain and impaired 
hearing in both ears.  He reported difficulty clearing his ears 
during the descent but continued the dive.  It was found that 
both his eardrums were ruptured. 
August 2005 05/239 
A snorkel diver entered the water by diving head first into the 
water from the platform of a boat.  The impact shattered the 
glass  of his face mask and he received minor cuts to his face.  
He was assisted from the water and given first aid treatment. 
 
 
 
46  ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
Boating and Surface 
March 2005 05/069 
Three divers completed a 39 min dive to a maximum depth of 
30m.  5 min before surfacing they deployed a delayed SMB.  
The boat approached too close to the divers, despite warnings 
from the dive marshal, and the SMB line became tangled 
around the dive ladder.  The diver marshal freed it.  The line 
then became tangled around the propeller; again the dive 
marshal freed it.  The divers completed a 1 min stop at 6m and 
surfaced without injury. 
March 2005 05/310 
Three divers were diving from an oil rig platform that had been 
converted into a dive resort.  They entered the water with the 
dive leader and found that there was a strong current.  One of 
the divers became separated from the others shortly after he 
entered the water.  He surfaced and managed to get back to the 
platform and leave the water.  The other two divers became 
separated from the dive leader.  The dive leader surfaced about 
400m down current from the rig and the other two surfaced 
closer to the rig.  The current carried the divers away.  There 
was no boat at the rig and assistance was requested by phone 
from the shore.  Two fishing boats arrived, picked up the divers 
and returned them to the rig. 
July 2005 05/218 
The Coastguard was alerted when a diver was overdue from a 
dive.  A helicopter was tasked to search.  The Coastguard then 
used prediction software to estimate the diver's position and 
tracking and identification systems to identify a vessel in the 
likely area.  The vessel was contacted and asked to keep a look 
out for the missing diver.  Shortly afterwards the vessel reported 
that they had spotted the missing diver and were recovering 
him.  The diver was then transferred to his own boat.  
(Coastguard report). 
 
 
 
Ascents 
October 2004 05/012 
A diver dived to a maximum depth of 25m.  Towards the end of 
the dive, at a depth of 6m, he deployed a delayed SMB.  Whilst 
doing so a line attached to the diver tangled in the SMB reel 
and he was pulled to the surface.  His dive duration was 49 min.  
He was placed on oxygen, other divers were recovered and the 
party returned to the shore.  The diver was taken to hospital but 
found to be fit.  He did not dive for 24 hours and no further 
action was taken. 
March 2005 05/071 
Three divers started a descent down a shotline.  Two of the 
three lost contact with the shotline in a slight current and all 
three resurfaced to regroup.  They had descended to 28m for 7 
min.  After a surface interval of 4 min they re-descended the 
shotline.   They reached a maximum depth of 29m but after 15 
min one of the three lost control of his buoyancy and made a 
rapid ascent to the surface from 20m.  He was recovered into 
the boat and placed on oxygen.  All other divers were recalled.  
The diver who had made the rapid ascent developed a minor 
headache.  The emergency services were alerted by radio and 
the group returned to shore.  The diver was taken to a medical 
facility and kept on oxygen for 2 hours.  No further symptoms 
developed and no further action was taken. 
April 2005 05/086 
A pair of divers conducted a dive to a maximum depth of 27m.  
Towards the end of the dive, at a depth of 20m, they prepared 
to make their ascent.  One of the pair then found that she could 
not dump air from the cuff dump of her drysuit.  She made a 
rapid ascent to the surface; her buddy made a normal ascent.  
Her computer did not indicate missed decompression stops. 
Her dive time was 24 min.   She was placed on oxygen.  She 
was later examined in hospital and found to be symptom-free.  
No problem was found with the dump valve. 
 
 
 
Technique 
March 2005 05/104 
Two divers entered the water to conduct a dive to a maximum 
depth of 30m.  At 15m one of the pair developed a problem with 
her face mask which kept flooding.  Whilst trying to resolve the 
problem she descended to a depth of 40m.  When she 
discovered this she started to fin upwards and put some air into 
her BCD.  She then lost control of her buoyancy and rose 
rapidly.  She managed to stop the ascent at 6m.  She stayed at 
this depth for 4 min and was rejoined by her buddy.  They 
continued the dive, re-descending to a maximum depth of 20m.  
32 min into the dive the diver who had made the rapid ascent 
started to experience a problem with her ears so they made 
their ascent, including a 3 min stop at 6m.  No subsequent ill 
effects were reported. 
May 2005 05/144 
Two divers completed a dive to 35m for 33 min with a 3 min 
stop at 9m and a 3 min stop at 6m.  After the dive one of the 
divers stated that his dive computer was indicating that a stop 
at 3m had been missed and had switched into 'SOS' mode.  His 
buddy's computer was clear.  Medical advice was sought and 
the diver was kept under observation for 24 hours.  No 
symptoms developed and no further action was taken. 
 
 
 
Equipment 
March 2005 05/070 
Two divers dived to a maximum depth of 35m.  At 32m one of 
the pair had a problem with air free flowing into his BCD.  His 
buddy took hold of him to prevent him from ascending.  They 
could not stop the free flow so they removed the feed hose from 
the BCD.  They made a normal ascent, with a 1 min safety stop 
at 6m, and they orally inflated the BCD at the surface.  Both 
were safely recovered from the water. 
May 2005 05/124 
Two divers dived to a maximum depth of 29m.  Towards the 
end of the dive, at a depth of 7m, the O-ring on one of the pair's 
cylinders blew.  Her buddy turned off the cylinder and the diver 
used her pony regulator.  The O-ring on the pony cylinder then 
blew and this was also turned off.  Another diver offered her 
octopus regulator.  The buddy deployed a delayed SMB and all 
three ascended safely to the surface. 
 
 
©BSAC - 2005   47 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
INCIDENT REPORTS 
 
If you would like to add to, correct or place a different interpretation upon any of the incidents in this report please put your 
comments in writing and send them to the following address: 
     The Incidents Advisor,  
     The British Sub-Aqua Club,  
     Telford's Quay,  
     South Pier Road, 
Ellesmere Port,  
     Cheshire,  
     CH65 4FL. 
 
For new incidents please complete a BSAC incident report form and send it to BSAC HQ at the address shown above.   
 
All  personal details are treated as confidential.  
 
Incident Report Forms can be obtained free of charge by phoning BSAC HQ on 0151  350 6200 
or from the BSAC Internet website.
 
 
Numerical & Statistical Analyses 
 
Statistical Summary of Incidents 
 
 
 
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Incidents Reported 385 351 315 397 452 397 439 465 453 409 498 499
Incidents Analysed 385 351 315 370 431 382 417 458 432 392 445 474
UK Incidents 322 318 295 349 404 357 384 433 414 366 423 441
Overseas Incidents 9 33 20 21 27 25 33 25 18 26 22 33
Unknown Locations 54 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0
UK Incident - BSAC Members 164 157 136 101 135 128 113 122 149 162 154 160
UK Incident - Non-BSAC Members 8 20 4 29 52 47 52 94 55 74 72 65
UK Incident - Membership Unknown 213 178 175 219 217 182 219 217 211 130 197 216
 
 
 
UK Incident  Report Source Analysis 
 
0 20 40 60 80 10
0
12
0
14
0
16
0
18
0
20
0
22
0
24
0
26
0
Total Reports: 578
Total Incidents: 441
Newspaper
Other
RNLI
Coastguard
BSAC Reports
 
 
48  ©BSAC - 2005 

NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005                          
 
 
History of UK Diving Fatalities 
 
  Number of Fatalities 
 
Year 
 
Membership BSAC Non-BSAC 
1965 6,813 3 - 
1966 7,979 1 4 
1967 8,350 1 6 
1968 9,241 2 1 
1969 11,299 2 8 
1970 13,721 4 4 
1971 14,898 0 4 
1972 17,041 10 31 
1973 19,332 9 20 
1974 22,150 3 11 
1975 23,204 2 - 
1976 25,310 4 - 
1977 25,342 3 - 
1978 27,510 8 4 
1979 30,579 5 8 
1980 24,900 6 7 
1981 27,834 5 7 
1982 29,590 6 3 
1983 32,177 7 2 
1984 32,950 8 5 
1985 34,861 8 6 
1986 34,210 6 9 
1987 34,500 6 2 
1988 32,960 10 6 
1989 34,422 4 8 
1990 36,434 3 6 
1991 43,475 8 9 
1992 45,626 9 8 
1993 50,722 3 6 
1994 50,505 6 6 
1995 52,364 9 9 
1996 48,920 7 9 
1997 48,412 4 12 
1998 46,712 6 16 
1999 46,682 8 9 
2000 41,692 6 11 
2001 41,272 9 13 
2002 39,960 4 10 
2003 38,340 5 6 
2004 37,153 6 19 
2005 37,185 5 12 
 
 
©BSAC - 2005   49 

  NDC Diving Incidents Report - 2005 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED IN INCIDENT REPORTS 
 
ARI  Aberdeen Royal Infirmary (Scotland, UK) 
AV  Artificial ventilation 
AWLB  All weather lifeboat 
BCD  Buoyancy compensation device (e.g. stab jacket) 
CAGE  Cerebral arterial gas embolism 
CG  Coastguard 
CPR  Cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
DCI  Decompression illness 
DDRC  Diving Diseases Research Centre (Plymouth, UK) 
ECG  Electrocardiogram 
EPIRB  Emergency position indicating radiobeacon 
GPS  Global positioning system 
Helo  Helicopter 
HLS  Helicopter landing site 
HMCG  Her Majesty’s Coastguard 
ILB  Inshore lifeboat 
IV  Intravenous 
LB  Lifeboat 
m   Metre 
min  Minute(s) 
MRSC  Marine rescue sub centre 
PFO  Patent foramen ovale 
POB  Persons on board 
QAH  Queen Alexandra Hospital (Portsmouth, UK) 
RAF  Royal Air Force 
RHIB  Rigid hull inflatable boat 
RN  Royal Navy 
RNLI  Royal National Lifeboat Institution 
ROV  Remotely operated vehicle 
SAR  Search and rescue 
SMB  Surface marker buoy 
999  UK emergency phone number 
 
 
50  ©BSAC - 2005 

